[Music]
hi everyone this is Zula from edura and
I welcome you to this session on
artificial intelligence full course in
this video I'll be covering all the
domains and the concepts involved Under
the Umbrella of artificial intelligence
and I will also be showing you a couple
of use cases and practical
implementations by using python so
there's a lot to cover in this session
and let me quickly run you through
today's agenda so we're going to begin
this session by understanding the
history of artificial intelligence and
how it came into existence we'll follow
this by looking at why we talking about
artificial intelligence now why has it
gotten so famous right now then we'll
look at what exactly is artificial
intelligence we'll discuss the
applications of artificial intelligence
after which we'll discuss the basics of
AI wherein we'll understand the
different types of artificial
intelligence we'll follow this by
understanding the different programming
languages that can be used to study Ai
and we'll understand why we're going to
choose python all right I'll introduce
you to Python and then we'll move on and
discuss machine learning here we'll
discuss the different types of machine
learning the different algorithms
involved in machine learning which
include classification algorithms
regression algorithms clustering and
Association algorithms to make you
understand machine learning better we'll
run a couple of demos wherein we'll see
how machine learning algorithm ithms are
used to solve real world problems after
that we'll discuss the limitations of
machine learning and why deep learning
is needed I'll introduce you to the Deep
learning Concepts what are neurons
perceptrons multiple layer perceptrons
and so on we'll discuss the different
types of neural networks and we'll also
look at what exactly back propagation is
apart from this we'll be running a demo
to understand deep learning in more
depth and finally we'll move on to the
next module which is natural language
processing under natural language
processing we'll try to understand what
is text mining the difference between
text Mining and NLP what are the
different terminologies in NLP and we'll
end the session by looking at a
practical implementation of NLP using
python all right so guys there's a lot
to cover in today's session also if you
want to stay updated about the recent
Technologies and would like to learn
more about the trending Technologies
make sure you subscribe to our YouTube
channel to never miss out on such
sessions so let's move ahead and take a
look at our first topic which is history
of artificial intelligence
so guys the concept of artificial
intelligence goes back to the classical
ages under Greek mythology the concept
of machines and mechanical men were well
thought of so an example of this is
Talos I don't know how many of you have
heard of this Talos was a giant animated
bronze Warrior who was programmed to
guard the island of creit now these are
just ideas nobody knows if this was
actually implemented but machine
learning and AI were thought of long ago
now let's get back to to the 19th
century now 1950 was speculated to be
one of the most important years for the
introduction of artificial intelligence
in 1950 Alan Turing published a paper in
which he speculated about the
possibility of creating machines that
think so he created what is known as the
Turing test this test is basically used
to determine whether or not a computer
can think intelligently like a human
being he noted that thinking is
difficult to Define and wi is his famous
touring test so basically if a machine
can carry out a conversation that was
indistinguishable from a conversation
with a human being then it was
reasonable to say that the machine is
thinking meaning that the machine will
pass the touring test now unfortunately
up to this date we haven't found a
machine that has fully cleared the
touring test so the touring test was
actually the first serious proposal in
the philosophy of artificial
intelligence followed by this was the
era of 1951 this was also known as the
game AI so in 1951 by using the fan Mark
1 machine of the University of
Manchester a computer scientist known as
Christopher straty wrote a checker
program and at the same time a program
was written for chess as well now these
programs were later improved and redone
but this was the first attempt at
creating programs that could play chess
or that could compete with humans in
playing chess this is followed by the
year 1956
now this is probably the most important
year in the invention of AI because in
1956 for the first time the term
artificial intelligence was coined all
right so the term artificial
intelligence was coined by John mcari at
the Dartmouth conference in
1956 coming to the year 1959 the first
AI laboratory was established this
period marked the research era for AI so
the first AI lab where research was
performed is the MIT lab which which is
still running till date in 1960 the
first robot was introduced to the
General Motors Assembly line in 1961 the
first chatbot was invented all right now
we have Siri we have Alexa but in 1961
there was a chatbot known as Eliza which
was introduced this was followed by the
famous IBM deep blue in 1997 the news
broke down that IBM's deep blue beats
the world champion Gary kasprow in the
game of chess so this was kind of the
first accomplishment of AI it was able
to beat the world champion at chess so
in 2005 when the DARPA Grand Challenge
was held a robotic car named Stanley
which was built by Stanford's racing
team won the DARPA Grand Challenge that
was another big accomplishment of EI in
2011 IBM's question answering system
Watson defeated the two greatest
Jeopardy champions Brad Reta and Ken
Jennings so guys this was how AI evolved
it started off as a hypothetical
situation right now it's the most
important technology in today's world
right if you look around everywhere
everything around us is run through AI
deep learning or machine learning so
since the emergence of AI in the 1950s
we have actually seen an exponential
growth in its potential so AI covers
domains such as machine learning deep
learning neural networks natural
language processing knowledge based
expert systems and so on it has also
made its way into to computer vision and
image processing now the question here
is if AI has been here for over half a
century why has it suddenly gain so much
importance why are we talking about
artificial intelligence now let me tell
you the main reasons for the demand of
AI the first reason is that we have more
computational power now so artificial
intelligence requires a lot of computing
power recently many advances have been
made and complex deep learning modules
are deployed and one of the greatest
technology that made this possible are
gpus right since we have more
computational power now it is possible
for us to implement AI in our daily
aspects second most important reason is
that we have a lot of data at present
we're generating data at an immeasurable
Pace right we are generating data
through social media through iot devices
every possible way there's a lot of data
so we need to find a method or a
solution that can help us process this
much data
and help us derive useful insights so
that we can grow businesses with the
help of data right so that process is
basically artificial intelligence so in
order to have a useful AI agent to make
smart decisions like telling which item
to recommend you next when you shop
online or how to classify an object from
an image AI are trained on large data
sets and Big Data enables us to do this
more efficiently next reason is now we
have better algorithms
right now we have very effective
algorithms which are based on the idea
of neural networks neural networks is
nothing but the concept behind deep
learning since we have better algorithms
which can do better computations and
quicker computations with more accuracy
the demand for AI has increased another
reason is that universities governments
startup and Tech Giants are all
investing in AI okay so companies like
Google Amazon Facebook Microsoft all of
these companies have heavily invested in
artificial intelligence because they
believe that AI is the future so AI is
rapidly growing both as a field of study
and also as an economy so actually this
is the right time for you to understand
what is AI and how it works so let's
move on and understand what exactly
artificial intelligence is the term
artificial intelligence was first coined
in the year 1956 by John maati at the
Dartmouth conference right I already
mentioned this before it was the birth
of AI in 1956 now how did he Define
artificial intelligence John maati
defined AI as the science and
engineering of making intelligent
machines in other words artificial
intelligence is the theory and
development of computer systems able to
perform tasks that normally require
human intelligence such as visual
perception speech recognition decision
making and translation between languages
so guys in a sense EI is a technique of
getting machines to work and behave like
humans in the recent past artificial
intelligence has been able to accomplish
this by creating machines and robots
that have been used in wide range of
fields including Healthcare robotics
marketing business analytics and many
more with this in mind let's discuss a
couple of real world applications of AI
so that you understand how important
artificial intelligence is in today's
world now one of the most famous
applications of artificial intelligence
is the Google productive search engine
when you begin typing a search term and
Google makes recommendations for you to
choose from that is artificial
intelligence in action so predictive
searches are based on data that Google
collects about you such as your browser
history your location your age and other
personal details so by using artificial
intelligence Google attempts to guess
what you might be trying to find now
behind this there's a lot of natural
language processing deep learning and
machine learning involved we'll be disc
discussing all of those Concepts in the
further slides right it's not very
simple to create a search engine but the
logic behind Google search engine is
artificial intelligence moving on in the
finance sector JP Morgan's Chase
contract intelligence platform uses
machine learning artificial intelligence
and image recognition software to
analyze legal documents now let me tell
you that manually reviewing around
12,000 agreements took over 36,000 hours
that's a lot of time but as soon as this
task was replaced by a AI machine it was
able to do this in a matter of seconds
so that's the difference between
artificial intelligence and manual or
human work even though AI cannot think
and reason like humans but the
computational power is very strong
compared to humans right because of
machine learning algorithms deep
learning Concepts and natural language
processing AI has reached a stage
wherein it can compute the most complex
to complex problems in a matter of
seconds
coming to healthcare IBM is one of the
Pioneers that has developed AI software
specifically for medicine let me tell
you that more than 230 Healthcare
organizations use IBM aai technology
which is basically IBM Watson in 2016
IBM Watson technology was able to cross
reference 20 million oncology records
quickly and correctly diagnose a rare
leukemia condition in a patient so it
basically went through 20 million
records with which it probably did in a
matter of seconds or minutes max to Max
and then it correctly diagnosed a
patient with rare leukemia knowing that
machines are now used in medical Fields
as well shows how important AI has
become it has reached every domains of
Our Lives let me give you another
example the Google's aii doctor is
another initiative which is taken by
Google where they're working with an
Indian iare chain to develop a
artificial intelligence system which can
examine retina scan and identify a
condition called diabetic retinopathy
which can cause blindness now in social
media platforms like Facebook artificial
intelligence is used for face
verification wherein you make use of
machine learning and deep learning
Concepts in order to detect facial
features and tag your friends all the
auto tagging feature that you see on
Facebook behind that there's machine
learning deep learning neural networks
there's only AI behind it so we're
actually unaware that we use AI very
regularly in our life all these social
media platforms like Instagram Facebook
Twitter they heavily rely on artificial
intelligence another such example is
Twitter's AI which is being used to
identify any sort of hate speech and
terroristic languages in tweets so again
it makes use of machine learning deep
learning natural language processing in
order to filter out any offensive or any
reportable content all right now
recently the company discovered around
300,000 terroristic link accounts and
95% of these were found by nonhuman
artificially intelligent machines coming
to Virtual assistants we have virtual
assistants like Siri and Alexa right now
let me tell you about another newly
released Google's virtual assistant
called the Google duplex which has
astonished millions of people around the
world not only can it respond to calls
and book appointments for you it also
adds a human touch so it adds human f
filters and all of that it makes it
sound very realistic it's actually very
hard to distinguish between human and
the AI speaking over the phone another
famous application of AI is self-driving
cars so artificial intelligence
implements computer vision image
detection deep learning in order to
build cars that can automatically detect
any objects or any obstacles and drive
around without human intervention so
these are fully automated self-driving
cars also on musk talks a lot about how
AI is implemented in Tesla's
self-driving cars he quoted that Tesla
will have fully self driving cars ready
by the end of the year and a robo taxi
version that can Ferry passengers
without anyone behind the wheel so if
you look at it AI is actually used by
the tech Giants right a lot of Tech
Giant companies like Google Tesla
Facebook all of these datadriven
companies in fact Netflix also makes use
of AI right so coming to Netflix so so
with the help of artificial intelligence
and machine learning Netflix has
developed personalized movie
recommendations for each of its users
right so if each of you open up Netflix
and if you look at the type of movies
that are recommended to you they are
different this is because Netflix
studies each user's personal details and
tries to understand what each user is
interested in and what sort of movie
patterns each user has and then it
recommends movies to them so Netflix
uses the watching hisory of other users
with similar taste to recommend what you
may be most interested in watching next
so that you can you know stay engaged
and continue your monthly subscription
also it is a known fact that over 75% of
what you watch is recommended by Netflix
so their recommendation engine is
brilliant and the logic behind their
recommendation engine is machine
learning and artificial intelligence
apart from Netflix Gmail also uses AI on
a everyday basis if you open up your
inbox right now you will notice that
there are separate sections right for
example we have primary section social
section and all of that Gmail has a
separate section called the spam meals
also so what GMail does is it makes use
of concepts of artificial intelligence
and machine learning algorithms to
classify emails as spam and non-spam
many of times certain words or phrases
are frequently used in spam emails if
you notice your spam emails they have
words like Lottery earn full refund all
of this denotes that the email is more
likely to be a Spam one so such words
and correlations are understood by using
machine learning and natural language
processing and a few other aspects of
artificial intelligence so Guys these
were the common applications of
artificial intelligence now let's
discuss the different types of AI so AI
is divided into three different
evolutionary stages or you can say that
there are three stages of artificial
intelligence first we have artificial
narrow intelligence followed by
artificial general intelligence and that
is followed by artificial super
intelligence artificial narrow
intelligence which is also known as weak
AI it involves applying artificial
intelligence only to specific tasks so
many currently existing systems that
claim to use artificial intelligence are
actually operating as weak AI focused on
a narrowly defined specific problem let
me give you an example of artificial
narrow intelligence Alexa is a very good
example of vki it operates within a
limited predefined range of functions
there's no genuine intelligence or there
is no self-awareness despite being a
sophisticated example of vki the Google
search engine Sophia the humanoid
self-driving cars and even the famous
alphago fall under the category of week
AI so guys right now we are at the stage
of artificial narrow intelligence or we
AI we haven't actually reached
artificial general intelligence or
artificial super intelligence but let's
look at what exactly it would be like if
you reach artificial general
intelligence now artificial general
intelligence which is also known as
strong AI it involves machines that
possess the ability to perform any
intelligent task that a human being can
now there's actually something that a
lot of people don't realize machines
don't possess humanlike abilities right
they have a very very strong processing
unit that can perform high level
computations but they're not yet capable
of doing the simple and the most
reasonable things that a human being can
now if you tell a machine to process
like a million documents it'll probably
do that in a matter of 10 seconds or a
minute or even 10 minutes but if you ask
a machine to walk up to your living room
and switch on the TV a machine will take
forever to learn that because machines
don't have the reasonable way of
thinking they have a very strong
Processing Unit but they're not yet
capable of thinking and reasoning like a
human being so that's exactly why we're
still stuck on artificial narrow
intelligence so far we haven't developed
any machine that can fully be called
strong AI even though there are examples
of alphao zero which defeated Alpha go
in the game of Go alphao zero basically
learned in a span of four months right
it learned on its own without any human
intervention but even then it was not
classified as a fully strong artificial
intelligence because it cannot reason
like a human being moving on to
artificial super intelligence now this
is a term refering to the time when the
capabilities of a computer will surpass
that of a human being in all actuality
it'll take a while for this to achieve
artificial super intelligence presently
it's seen as a hypothetical situation as
depicted in movies and any science
fiction books wherein machines have
taken over the World movies like
Terminator and all of that depict
artificial super intelligence now these
don't exist yet which we should be
thankful for but there are a lot of
people who speculate that artificial
super intelligence will take over the
world by the year 2040 so Guys these
were the different types or different
stages of artificial intelligence to
summarize everything like I said before
narrow intelligence is the only thing
that exists for now we have only weak AI
or weak artificial intelligence all the
major AI technologies that you see are
artificial narrow intelligence right we
don't have any machines which are
capable of thinking like human beings or
reasoning like a human being now let's
move on and discuss the different
programming languages for AI so there
are actually n number of languages that
can be used for artificial intelligence
I'm going to mention a few of them so
first we have python python is probably
the most famous language for artificial
intelligence or it's also known as the
most effective language for AI because a
lot of developers prefer to use python
and a lot of data scientists are also
comfortable with the Python language
this is partly because the syntaxes
which belong to python are very simple
and they can be learned very easily it's
considered to be one of the most easiest
language to learn and also many AI
algorithms and machine learning
algorithms can be easily implemented in
Python because there are a lot of
libraries which have predefined
functions for these algorithms so all
all you have to do is you have to call
that function you don't actually have to
code your algorithm so python is
considered the best choice for
artificial intelligence with python
stands R which is a statistical
programming language now R is one of the
most effective language and environment
for analyzing and manipulating the data
for statistical purpose right it is a
statistical programming language so
using R we can easily produce
well-designed publication quality plots
including mathematical symbols and
formula wherever needed if you ask me I
think R is also one of the easiest
programming languages to learn the
syntax is very similar to English
language and it also has n number of
libraries that support statistics data
science AI machine learning and so on it
also has predefined functions for
machine learning algorithms natural
language processing and so on so R is
also a very good choice if you want to
get started with programming languages
for machine learning or AI apart from
from this we have Java now Java can also
be considered as a good choice for AI
development artificial intelligence has
a lot to do with search algorithms
artificial neural networks and genetic
programming and Java provides many
benefits right it's easy to use
debugging is very easy package Services
there is a simplified work with large
scale projects there's a good user
interaction and graphical representation
of data it has something known as the
standard widget toolkit which can be
used for making graphs and interfaces so
graphical visualization is actually a
very important part of AI or data
science or machine learning for that
matter now let me list out a few more
languages we also have something known
as Lis now shockingly a lot of people
have not heard of this language this is
actually the oldest and the most suited
language for the development of
artificial intelligence it is considered
to be a language which is very suited
for the development of artificial
intelligence now let me tell you that
this language was invented by John maati
who's also known as the father of
artificial intelligence right he was the
person who coined the term artificial
intelligence it has the capability of
processing symbolic information it has
excellent prototyping capabilities it is
easy and it creates Dynamic objects with
a lot of ease there's automatic garbage
collection and all of that but over the
years because of advancements many of
these features have migrated into many
other languages and that's why a lot of
people don't go for lisp right there are
a lot of new languages which are more
effective features or which have better
packages you can say another language
I'd like to talk about is prologue
prologue is frequently used in knowledge
based and expert systems the features
provided by prologue include pattern
matching tree based data structuring
automatic backtracking and so on all of
these features provide a very powerful
and flexible programming framework
prologue is actually widely used in
medical projects and also for Designing
expert AI systems apart from this we
also have C++ we have SAS we have
JavaScript which can also be used for AI
we have ma lab we have Julia all of
these languages are actually considered
pretty good languages for artificial
intelligence but for now if you ask me
which programming language should I go
for I would say python python has all
the possible packages is and it is very
easy to understand and easy to learn so
let's look at a couple of features of
python we'll see why we should go for
python first of all python was created
in the year 1989 it is actually a very
easy programming language right that's
one of the reasons why a lot of people
prefer python it's very easy to
understand it's very easy to grasp this
language so python is an interpreted
objectoriented high level programming
language and it can be very easily
implemented now let me tell you a few
features of python it's very simple and
easy to learn like I mentioned it is one
of the easiest programming language and
it is also free and open source apart
from that it is a highlevel language you
don't have to worry about anything like
memory allocation it is portable meaning
that you can use it on any platform like
Linux Windows Macintosh Solaris and so
on it supports different programming
paradigms like object oriented and
procedure oriented programming and it is
extend ible meaning that it can invoke C
and C++ libraries apart from this let me
tell you that python is actually gaining
unbelievably huge momentum in AI right
the language is used to develop data
science algorithms machine learning
algorithms and iot projects there other
advantages to python also the fact that
you don't have to code much when it
comes to python for AI or machine
learning this is because there are
readymade packages there are predefined
packages that have all the functions and
algorithms stor for example there is
something known as py brain which can be
used for machine learning numpy which
can be used for scientific computation
pandas and so on there are a number of
libraries in Python so guys I'm not
going to go into depth of python right
I'm not going to explain python to you
since this session is about artificial
intelligence so those of you who don't
know much about python or who are new to
python I will leave a couple of links in
the description box you all can get
started with program in and any other
Concepts or any other doubts that you
have on python right we have a lot of
content around programming with python
or python for machine learning and so on
now let's move on and talk about one of
the most important aspects of artificial
intelligence which is machine learning
now a lot of people always ask me this
question is machine learning and
artificial intelligence the same thing
well both of them are not the same thing
the difference between Ai and machine
learning is that machine learning is
used in artificial intelligence machine
learning is a method through which you
can feed a lot of data to a machine and
make it learn now ai is a vaster field
under AI we have machine learning we
have NLP we have expert systems we have
image recognition object detection and
so on we have deep learning also so AI
is sort of a process or it's a
methodology in which you make machines
mimic the behavior of human beings
machine learning is a way in which you
feed a lot of data to a machine so that
it can make its own decisions let's get
into depth about machine learning so
first we'll understand the need for
machine learning or why machine learning
came into existence now the need for
machine learning began since the
technical Revolution itself so guys
since technology became the center of
everything we've been generating an
immeasurable amount of data as per
research we generate around 2.5 quillion
bytes of data every single day and and
it is estimated that by this year 2020
1.7 MB of data will be created every
second for every person on Earth so as
I'm speaking to you right now I'm
generating a lot of data now you
watching this video on YouTube also
accounts for data generation so there's
data everywhere so with the availability
of so much data it is finally possible
to build predictive models that can
study and analyze complex data to find
useful insights and deliver more
accurate results so Top tire companies
like Netflix and Amazon build such
machine learning models by using tons of
data in order to identify any profitable
opportunity and avoid any unwanted risk
so guys one thing you all need to know
is that the most important thing for
artificial intelligence is data for
artificial intelligence or whether it's
machine learning or deep learning it's
always data and now that we have a lot
of data we can find a way to analyze
process and draw useful insights from
this data in order to help us grow
businesses or to find solutions to some
problems data is the solution we just
need to know how to handle the data and
the way to handle data is through
machine learning deep learning and
artificial intelligence a few reasons
why machine learning is so important is
number one due to increase in data
generation so due to excessive
production of data we need to find a
method that can be used to structure
analyze and draw use useful insights
from data this is why machine learning
comes in right it is used to solve
problems and find solutions to the most
complex tasks faced by organizations
apart from this we also needed to
improve decision making so by making use
of various algorithms machine learning
can be used to make Better Business
decisions for example machine learning
is used to forecast sales it is used to
predict any downfalls in the stock
market or identify any sort of risk and
anomalies other reasons include that
machine learning helps us uncover
patterns and Trends in data so finding
hidden patterns and extracting key
insights from data is the most important
part of machine learning so by building
predictive models and using statistical
techniques machine learning allows you
to dig beneath the surface and explore
the data at a minute scale understanding
data and extracting patterns manually
takes a lot of time right it takes
several days for us to EXT any useful
information from data but if you use
machine learning algorithms you can
perform similar computations in less
than a second another reason is we need
to solve complex problems so from
detecting the genes linked to the deadly
ALS disease to building self-driving
cars machine learning can be used to
solve the most to most complex problems
at present we've also found a way to
spot Stars which are like 2,400 light
years away from our planet okay all of
this is possible through AI machine
learning deep learning and these
techniques so to Summit up machine
learning is very important at present
because we're facing a lot of issues
with data we're generating a lot of data
and we have to handle this data in such
a way that it benefits us so that's why
machine learning comes in moving on what
exactly is machine learning so let me
give you a short history of machine
learning so machine learning was first
coined by Arthur Samuel in the year 1959
which is just 3 years from when
artificial intelligence was coined right
so looking back that year was probably
the most significant in terms of
technological advancements because most
of the Technologies today are based on
the concept of machine learning most of
the AI Technologies itself are based on
the concept of machine learning and deep
learning don't get confused about
machine learning and deep learning we'll
discuss about deep learning in the
further slides where we'll also see the
difference between AI machine learning
and deep learning so coming back to what
exactly machine learning is so if you
browse to the internet you'll find a lot
of definitions about what exactly
machine learning is one of the
definitions I found was a computer
program is set to learn from experience
e with respect to some class of task T
and performance measure P if its
performance at tasks in t as measured by
P improves with experience e that's very
confusing so let me just narrow it down
to you in simple terms machine learning
is a subset of artificial intelligence
which provides machines the ability to
learn automatically and improve from
experience without being explicitly
programmed to do so in the sense it is
the practice of getting machines to
solve problems by gaining the ability to
think but now you might be thinking how
can a machine think or make decisions
now machines are very similar to humans
okay if you feed a machine a good amount
of data it will learn how to interpret
process and analyze this data by using
machine learning algorithms and it will
help you solve real world problems so
what happens here is a lot of data is
fed to the machine the machine will
train on this data and it'll build a
predictive model with the help of
machine learning algorithms in order to
predict some outcome or in order to find
some solution to a problem so it
involves data you're going to train the
machine and build a model by using
machine learning algorithm in order to
predict some outcome or to find a
solution to a problem so that is a
simple way of understanding what exactly
machine learning is I'll be going into
more depth about machine learning so
don't worry if you haven't understood
anything as of now now let's discuss a
couple of terms which are frequently
used in machine learning right so the
first definition that we come across
very often is an algorithm all right so
basically a machine learning algorithm
is a set of rules and statistical
techniques that is used to learn
patterns from data and draw significant
information from it okay so guys the
logic behind a machine learning model is
basically the machine learning algorithm
okay an example of a machine learning
algorithm is linear regression or
decision tree or a random forest all of
these are machine learning algorithms
which Define the logic behind a machine
learning model now what is a machine
learning model a model is actually the
main component of a machine learning
process okay so a model is trained by
using the machine learning algorithm now
the difference between an algorithm and
a model is that an algorithm maps all
the decisions that a model is supposed
to take based on the given input in
order to get the correct output all
right so the model will use the machine
learning algorithm in order to draw
useful insights from the input and give
you an outcome that is very precise all
right that's the machine learning model
the next definition we have is predictor
variable now a predictor variable is any
feature of the data that can be used to
predict the output okay let me give you
an example to make you understand what a
predictor variable is let's say you're
trying to predict the height of a person
depending on his weight right so here
your predictor variable becomes your
weight because you're using the weight
of a person to predict the person's
height so your predictor variable
becomes your weight the next definition
is response variable now in the same
example height would be the response
variable response variable is also known
as the target variable or the output
variable right this is the variable that
you're trying to predict by using the
predictor variables so a response
variable is a feature or the output
variable that needs to be predicted by
using the predictor variables right next
we have something known as training data
now training and testing data are
terminologies that you'll come across
very often in a machine learning process
so training data is basically the data
that is used to create the machine
learning model all right so basically in
a machine learning process when you feed
data to the machine it'll be divided
into two parts all right so splitting
the data into two parts is also known as
data splicing so you'll take your input
data you'll divide it into two sections
one you'll call the training data and
the other you'll call the testing data
so then you have something known as the
testing data the training data is
basically used to create the machine
learning model right the training data
helps the model to identify key trends
and patterns which are essential to
predict the output now the testing data
is after the model is trained it must be
tested in order to evaluate how
accurately it can predict an outcome all
right now this is done by using the
testing data so basically the training
data is used to train the model the
testing data is used to test the
efficiency of the model all right now
let's move on and look at our next topic
which is machine learning process so
what is the machine machine learning
process now the machine learning process
involves building a predictive model
that can be used to find a solution for
a problem statement now in order to
solve any problem in machine learning
there are a couple of steps that you
need to follow all right let's look at
the steps the first step is you define
the objective of your problem and the
second step is data Gathering which is
followed by preparing your data data
exploration building a model model
evaluation and finally making your
predictions right now in order to
understand the machine learning process
let's assume that you've been given a
problem that needs to be solved by using
machine learning right so the problem
that uh you need to solve is you need to
predict the occurrence of rain in your
local area by using machine learning all
right so basically you need to predict
the possibility of rain by studying the
weather conditions so what we did here
is we basically looked at step number
one which is Define the objective of the
problem now here you need to ask answer
questions such as what are we trying to
predict is our output going to be a
continuous variable or is it going to be
a discrete variable these are the kind
of questions that you need to answer in
the first stage which is defining the
objective of the problem right so yeah
exactly what are the Target features so
here you need to understand which is
your target variable and what are the
different predictor variables that you
need in order to predict this outcome
right so here our Target variable will
be basically a variable that can tell us
whether it's going to rain or not input
data is we'll need data such as maybe
the temperature on a particular day or
the humidity level the precipitation and
so on right so you need to define the
objective at this stage so basically you
have to form an idea of the problem at
this stage right another question that
you need to ask yourself is what kind of
problem are you solving is this a binary
classification problem or is this a
clustering problem or is this a
regression problem now a lot of you
might not be familiar with the terms
classification clustering and regression
in terms of machine learning don't worry
I'll explain all of these terms in the
upcoming slides all you need to
understand at step one is you need to
Define how you're going to solve the
problem you need to understand what sort
of data you need to solve the problem
how you're going to approach the problem
what are you trying to predict what
variables you'll need in order to
predict the outcome and so on right
let's move on and look at our step
number two which is data Gathering now
in this stage you must be asking
questions such as what kind of data is
needed to solve this problem and is this
data available and if it is available
from where can I get this data and how
can I get the data right data Gathering
is one of the most timec consuming steps
in machine learning process right if you
have to go manually and collect the data
it's going to take a lot of time but
lucky for us there are lot of resources
online which provide uh data sets right
all you have to do is web scraping or
you just have to go ahead and download
data one of the websites I can tell you
all about is kagle right so if you're a
beginner in machine learning don't worry
about data Gathering and all of that all
you have to do is go to websites such as
kaggle and just download a data set so
coming back to the problem that we are
discussing which is predicting the
weather the data needed for weather
forecasting includes measures like
humidity level the temperature the
measure the locality whether or not you
live in a hill station such data has to
be collected and stored for analysis
right so all the data is collected
during the data Gathering stage this
step is followed by data preparation or
also known as data cleaning right so if
you're going around collecting data it's
almost never in the right format and
even if you are taking data from uh
online resources from any website even
then the data will require cleaning and
preparation all right the data is never
in the right format you have to do some
sort of preparation and some sort of
cleaning in order to make the data ready
for analysis so what you'll encounter
while cleaning data is you'll encounter
a lot of inconsistencies in the data set
like you'll encounter some missing
values redundant variables duplicate
values and all of that so removing such
inconsistencies is very important
because they might lead to any wrongful
computations and predictions okay so at
this stage you can scan the data set for
any consistencies and you can fix them
then and there now let me give you a
small fact about data cleaning so there
was a survey that was done last year or
so I'm not sure and a lot of data
scientists were asked which Step was the
most difficult or the most annoying and
time consuming of all and 80% of the
data scientists said it was Data
cleaning right data cleaning takes up
80% of their time so it's not very easy
to get rid of missing values and
corrupted data and even if you get rid
of missing values sometimes your data
set might get affected right it might
get biased because maybe one variable
has too many missing values and this
will affect your outcome so you'll have
to fix such issues you'll have to deal
with all of this missing data and
corrupted data right so data cleaning is
actually one of the hardest steps in
machine learning process okay now let's
move on and look at our next step which
is exploratory data analysis so here
what you do is you basically become a
detective in this stage so this stage
which is Eda or exploratory data
analysis is like the brainstorming stage
of machine learning data exploration
involves understanding the patterns and
the trends in your data all right so at
this stage all the useful insights are
drawn and any correlations between the
various variables are understood what do
I mean by Trends and patterns and
correlations now let's consider our
example which is we have to predict the
rainfall on a particular day so we know
that there is a strong possibility of
rain if the temperature has fallen low
all right so we know that our output
will depend on variables such as
temperature humidity and so on now to
what level it depends on these variables
we'll have to find out that right we'll
have to find out the patterns and we'll
have to find out the correlations
between such variables so such patterns
and Trends have to be understood and
mapped at this stage all right so this
is what exploitatory data analysis is
about it's the most important part of
machine learning this is where you'll
understand what exactly your data is and
how you can form the solution to your
problem all right the next step in a
machine learning process is building a
machine learning model so all the
insights and the patterns that you
derive during the data exploration are
used to build the machine learning model
so this stage always Begins by splitting
the data set into two parts which is
training data and testing data I already
discussed with you that the data that
you use in a machine learning process is
always split into two parts right we
have the training data and we have the
testing data now when you're building a
model you always use the training data
so you always make use of the training
data in order to build the model now a
lot of you might be asking what is
training data like is it different from
the input data that you're feeding to
the machine or is it different from the
testing data now training data is the
same input data that you're feeding to
the machine the only difference is that
you're splitting the data set into two
right you're randomly picking 80% of
your data and you're assigning it for
training purpose and the rest 20%
probably you'll assign it for testing
purpose all right so guys always
remember another thing that the training
data is always much more than your
testing data right obviously because you
need to train your machine and the more
data you fee the machine during the
training phase the better it will be
during the testing phase all right
obviously it'll predict better outcomes
if it is being trained on more data
correct so the model is basically using
the machine learning algorithm that
predicts the output by using the data
fed to it now in the case of predicting
rainfall the output will be a
categorical variable right because we'll
be predicting whether it's going to rain
or not okay so let's say we have a
output variable called rain right the
two possible values that this variable
can take is yes it's going to rain and
no it won't rain correct so that is our
outcome our outcome is a classification
or a categorical variable so for such
cases where your outcome is a
categorical variable you'll be using
classification algorithms okay an
example of a classification algorithm is
logistic regression or you can also use
support Vector machines you can use K
nearest neighbor and you can also use
naive bias and so on now don't worry
about these terms I'll be discussing all
these algorithms with you but just
remember that while you're building a
machine learning model you'll make use
of the training data you'll train the
model by using the training data and the
Machine learning algorithm now like I
said choosing the machine learning
algorithm depends on the problem
statement that you're trying to solve
because there n number of machine
learning algorithms you'll have to
choose the algorithm that is the most
suitable for your problem statement so
step number six is model evaluation and
optimization now after you've done
building a model by using the training
data set it is finally time to put the
model to a test right the testing data
set is used to check the efficiency of
the model and how accurately it can
predict the outcome so once the accuracy
is calculated any further improvements
in the model can be implemented during
this stage there are various methods
that can help you improve the
performance of the model like you can
use parameter tuning and cross
validation methods in order to improve
the performance of the model now the
main things you need to remember during
model evaluation and optimization is
that model evaluation is nothing but
you're testing how well your model can
predict the outcome right so at this
stage you will be using the testing data
set in the previous stage which was
building a model you'll be using the
training data set but in the model
evaluation stage you'll be using the
testing data set now once you've tested
your model you need to calculate the
accuracy right you need to calculate how
accurately your model is predicting the
outcome after that if you find that you
need to improve your model in some way
or the other because the accuracy is not
very good then you'll use method such as
parameter tuning right don't worry about
these terms I'll discuss all of this
with you but I'm just trying to make
sure that you're understanding the
concept behind each of the phases in
machine learning it's very important you
understand each step okay now let's move
on and look at the last stage of machine
learning which is predictions now once
the model is evaluated and once you've
improved it it is finally used to make
predictions the final output can either
be a categorical variable or a
continuous variable now all of this
depends on your problem statement right
don't get confused about continuous
variables categorical variables I'll be
discussing all of this now in our case
because we're predicting the occurrence
of rainfall the output will be
categorical variable right it's obvious
because we are predicting whether it's
going to rain or not there itself we
understand that this is a classification
problem because we have a categorical
variable so that was the entire machine
learning process now it's time to learn
about the different ways in which
machines can learn all right so let's
move ahead and look at the types of
machine learning now this is one of the
most interesting Concepts in machine
learning the three different ways in
which machines learn all right there is
something known as supervised learning
unsupervised learning and reinforcement
learning so we'll go through this one by
one all right we'll understand what
supervised learning is first and then
we'll look at the other two types to
Define supervised learning it is
basically a technique in which we teach
or train the Machine by using the data
which is well labeled all right now in
order to understand uh superise learning
let's consider a small example so as
kids we all needed guidance to solve
math problems right a lot of us had
trouble solving math problems so our
teachers always helped us understand
what addition is and how it is done
similarly you can think of supervised
learning as a type of machine learning
that involves a guide all right the
label data set is a feacher that will
train you to understand the patterns in
the data so the label data set is
nothing but the training data set I'll
explain more about this in a while so to
understand supervised learning better
let's look at the figure on the screen
right here we are feeding the machine
images of Tom and Jerry and the goal is
for the machine to identify and classify
the images into two classes one will
contain images of Tom and the other will
contain images of Jerry now the main
thing that you need to note in
supervised learning is a training data
set the training data set is going to be
very well labeled now what do I mean
when I say that training data set is
labeled basically what we're doing is
we're telling the machine this is how
Tom looks and this is how Jerry looks by
doing this you're training the Machine
by using label data so the main thing
that you're doing here is you're
labeling every input data that you're
feeding to the model so basically your
entire training data set is labeled all
right whenever you're giving an image of
Tom there's going to be a label there
saying this is Tom and when you're
giving an image of Jerry you're saying
that this is how Jerry looks all right
so basically you're guiding the machine
and you're telling that listen this is
how Tom looks this is how Jerry looks
and now you need to classify them into
two different classes all right that's
how supervised Learning Works apart from
that it's the same old process after
getting the input data you're going to
perform data cleaning then there's
exploratory data analysis followed by uh
creating the model by using the machine
learning algorithm and then this is
followed by model evaluation and finally
your predictions all right now one more
thing to note here is that the output
that you get by using supervised
learning is also labeled output okay so
basically you'll get two different
classes of name Tom and one of name
Jerry and you'll get them labeled that
is how supervised Learning Works the
most important thing in supervised
learning is that you're training the
model by using labeled data set right
now now let's move on and look at
unsupervised learning we look at the
same example and understand how
unsupervised learning works so what
exactly is unsupervised learning now
this involves training by using
unlabeled data and allowing the model to
act on that information without any
guidance all right now like the name
suggests itself there is no supervision
here it's unsupervised learning so think
of unsupervised learning as a smart kid
that learns without any guidance okay in
this type of machine machine learning
the model is not fed with any label data
as in the model has no clue that this is
uh the image of Tom and this is Jerry
right it figures out patterns and the
differences between Tom and Jerry on its
own by taking in tons and tons of data
now how do you think the machine
identifies this as Tom and then finally
gives us the output like yes this is Tom
this is Jerry for example it identifies
prominent features of Tom such as pointy
ears bigger in size and so on to
understand that this image is of type
one similarly it finds such features in
Jerry and knows that this image is of
type two meaning that the first image is
different from the second image right so
what the unsupervised learning uh
algorithm or the model does is it'll
form two different clusters it'll form
one cluster which are very similar and
the other cluster which is very
different from the first cluster right
that's how unsupervised learning works
so the important things that you need to
know in unsupervised learning is that
you're going to feed the machine
unlabeled data right the machine has to
uh understand the patterns and discover
the output on its own and finally the
machine will form clusters based on
feature similarity all right now let's
move on and look at the last type of
machine learning which is reinforcement
learning reinforcement learning is quite
different when compared to supervised
and unsupervised learning right what
exactly is reinforcement learning it is
a part of of machine learning where an
agent is put in an environment and he
learns to behave in this environment by
performing certain actions and observing
the reward which it gets from those
actions to understand what reinforcement
learning is imagine that you were
dropped off at an isolated island what
would you do now Panic yes of course
initially we'll all Panic But as time
passes by you will learn how to live on
the island you will explore the
environment you will understand the
climate conditions the type of food that
grows there the dangers of the island
and so on this is exactly how
reinforcement learning works it
basically involves an agent which is you
stuck on the island that is put in an
unknown environment which is the island
where he must learn by observing and
Performing actions that result in
rewards all right so reinforcement
learning is mainly used in advanced
machine learning areas such as
self-driving cars and alphago I'm sure a
lot of you have heard of alphago right
so the logic behind alphao is nothing
but reinforcement learning and deep
learning and in reinforcement learning
there's not really any input data given
to the agent all he has to do is he has
to explore everything from scratch all
right it's like a newborn baby with no
information about anything he has to go
around exploring the environment and you
know getting rewards and Performing some
actions which result in either Rewards
or in some sort of punishment okay so
that sums up the types of machine
learning now before we move ahead I'd
like to discuss the difference between
the three types of machine learning just
to make the concept clear to you all so
let's start by looking at the
definitions of each in supervised
learning the machine will learn by using
the label data in unsupervised learning
there'll be unlabeled data and the
Machine has to learn without any
Supervision in reinforcement learning
there'll be an agent which interacts
with the environment by producing
actions and discovers errors or rewards
based on his actions right now what are
the type of problems that can be solved
by using supervised unsupervised and
reinforcement learning when it comes to
supervised learning the two main types
of problems that are solved is
regression problems and classification
problems when it comes to unsupervised
learning it is Association and
clustering problems when it comes to
reinforcement learning it's reward-based
problems I'll be discussing regression
classification clustering and all of
this in the upcoming slides so don't
worry if you don't understand this now
the type of data with is used in
supervised learning is labeled data in
unsupervised learning it is unlabeled
and in reinforcement learning we have no
pre-defined data set right the agent has
to do everything from scratch now the
type of training involved in each of
these learnings in supervised learning
there is external supervision as in
there is the label data set which acts
as a guide for the machine to learn in
unsupervised learning there's no
supervision again in reinforcement
learning there's no supervision at all
Now what is is the approach to solve
problems by using supervised
unsupervised and reinforcement learning
in supervised learning it is simple you
have to map the labeled input to the
known output right the machine knows
what the output looks like so you're
just labeling the input to the output in
unsupervised learning you're going to
understand the patterns and discover the
output here you have no clue about what
the input is right it's not labeled you
just have to understand the patterns and
you'll have to form clusters and
discover the output in reinforcement
learning there is no clue at all you'll
have to follow the trial and error
method right you'll have to go around
your environment you'll have to explore
the environment and you'll have to try
some actions and only once you perform
those actions you'll know that whether
this is a reward based action or whether
this is a punishment based action right
so reinforcement learning is totally
based on the concept of trial and error
okay now popular algorithms under
supervised learn include linear
regression logistic regression support
Vector machines Kus neighbor knife bias
and so on under unsupervised learning we
have the famous K means clustering
method c means and all of that under
reinforcement learning we have the
famous Q learning algorithm right I'll
be discussing these algorithms in the
upcoming slides right so let's move on
and look at the next topic which is the
types of problems solved using machine
learning now this is what we were
talking about earlier when I said
regression classification and clustering
problems okay so let's discuss what
exactly I mean by that in machine
learning all the problems can be
classified into three types right every
problem that is approached in machine
learning can be put into one of these
three categories okay so the first type
is known as regression then we have
classification and clustering so first
let's look at regression type of
problems so in this type of problem the
output is all always a continuous
quantity for example if you want to
predict the speed of a car given the
distance it is a regression problem now
a lot of you might not be very aware of
what exactly a continuous quantity is a
continuous quantity is any quantity that
can have an infinite range of values
okay for example the weight of a person
it is a continuous quantity because a
weight can be 50 50.1
50.1
50.2 1 50.0 321 and so on it can have an
infinite range of values correct so in
the type of problem that you have to
predict a continuous quantity you make
use of regression algorithms all right
so regression problems can be solved by
using supervised learning algorithms
like linear regression next we have
classification now in this type of
problems the output is always a
categorical value now when I say
categorical value it can be values such
as the gender of a person is a
categorical value okay now classifying
emails into two classes like spam and
non-spam is a classification problem
that can be solved by using supervised
learning classification algorithms like
support Vector machines naive buys
logistic regression kis neighbor and so
on right so again the main aim in
classification is to compute the
category of the data right coming to
clustering problems this time type of
problem involves assigning the input
into two or more clusters based on
feature similarity now as soon as I read
this sentence you should understand that
this is unsupervised learning right
because you don't have enough data about
your input and the only option that you
have is to form clusters right
categories are formed only when you know
that your data is of two type your input
data is labeled and it's of two types so
it's going to be a classification
problem but when a clustering problem
happens when you don't have much
information about your input right all
you have to do is you have to find
patterns and you have to understand that
data points which are similar are
clustered into one group and data points
which are different from the first group
are clustered into another group right
that's what clustering is an example is
in Netflix what happens is Netflix
clusters their users into similar groups
based on their interest based on their
age geography and so on right this can
be done by using unsupervised wi
learning algorithms like K means okay so
guys those were the three categories of
problems that can be solved by using
machine learning so basically what I'm
trying to say is all the problems will
fall into one of these categories so any
problem that you give to a machine
learning model it'll fall into one of
these categories okay now to make things
a little more interesting I have
collected real world data sets from
online resources and what we're going to
do is we're going to try and understand
if this is a regression problem or a
clustering problem or a classification
problem okay now the problem statement
in here is to study the house sales data
set and build a machine learning model
that predicts the house pricing index
now the most important thing you need to
understand when you read a problem
statement is you need to understand what
is your target variable what are the
possible predictor variables that you'll
need the first thing you should look at
is your target variable right if you
want to understand if this is a
classification regression or clustering
problem look at your target variable or
your output variable that you're
supposed to predict here you're supposed
to predict the house pricing index now
house pricing index is obviously a
continuous quantity so as soon as you
understand that you know that this is a
regression problem right so for this you
can make use of the linear regression
algorithm and you can predict the house
pricing Index right linear regression is
a regression algorithm it is a
supervised learn learning algorithm
we'll discuss more about it in the
further slides let's look at our next
problem statement here you have to study
a bank credit data set and make a
decision about whether to approve the
loan of an applicant based on his
profile now what is your output variable
over here your output variable is to
predict whether you can approve the loan
of a applicant or not so obviously your
output is going to be categorical right
it's either going to be yes or no no yes
is basically approve loan no is reject
loan right so here itself you understand
that this is a classification problem
okay so you can make use of algorithms
like K&N algorithm or you can make use
of support Vector machines in order to
do this so support Vector machines and
the KNN which is K nearest neighbor
algorithms are basically supervised
learning algorithms right we'll talk
more about that in the upcoming slides
moving on to our next problem statement
here the problem statement is to Cluster
a set of movies as either good or
average based on their social media
outreach now if you look properly your
clue is in the question itself the first
line itself says to Cluster a set of
movies as either good or average now
guys whenever you have a problem
statement that is asking you to group
the data set into different groups or to
form different different clusters it's
obviously a clustering problem right
here you can make use of the K means
clustering algorithm and you can form
two clusters one will contain the
popular movies and the other will
contain the non-popular movies right
these are small examples of how you can
use machine learning to solve clustering
problems regression and classification
problems the key is you need to identify
the type of problem first right now
let's move on and discuss the different
types of machine learning
algorithms right so we're going to start
by discussing the different supervised
learning algorithms so to give you a
quick overview we'll be discussing the
linear regression logistic regression
decision tree random Forest naive Bas
classifier support Vector machines and
korus neighbor right we'll be discussing
these seven algorithms so without any
further delay let's look at linear
regression first right now what exactly
is a linear regression algorithm so guys
linear regression is basically a
supervised learning algorithm that is
used to predict a continuous dependent
variable y based on the values of
independent variable X okay the
important thing to note here is that the
dependent variable y right the variable
that you're trying to predict is always
going to be a continuous variable but
the independent variable X which is
basically the predictor variables right
these are the variables that you'll be
using to predict your output variable
which is nothing but your dep dependent
variable so your independent variables
or your predictor variables can either
be continuous or discrete okay there is
no such restriction over here okay they
can be either continuous variables or
they can be discrete variables now again
I'll tell you what a continuous variable
is in case you've forgotten it is a
variable that has infinite number of
possibilities so I give you an example
of a person's weight right it can be 160
lb or they can weigh 16011 p pound or
16011 34b and so on right so the number
of possibilities for weight is Limitless
right and this is exactly what a
continuous variable is now in order to
understand linear regression let's
assume that you want to predict the
price of a stock over a period of time
okay for such a problem you can make use
of linear regression by studying the
relationship between the dependent
variable which is the stock price and
the independent variable which is the
time right you're trying to predict the
stock price over a period of time so
basically you're going to check how the
price of a stock varies over a period of
time so your stock price is going to be
your dependent variable or your output
variable and the time is going to be
your predictor variable or your
independent variable right let's not
confuse it anymore your dependent
variable is your output variable okay
your independent variable is your input
variable or your predictor variable
right so in our case the stock price is
obviously a continuous quantity because
the stock price can have a infinite
number of values right now the first
step in linear regression is always to
draw out a relationship between your
dependent and your independent variable
by using the best fitting linear line
all right we make an assumption that
your dependent and independent variable
is linearly related to each other right
we call it linear regression because
both the variables vary linearly which
means that while plotting the
relationship between these two variables
we'll get more of a straight line
instead of a curve okay let's discuss
the math behind linear regression so
this equation of here it denotes the
relationship between your independent
variable X which is here and your
dependent variable y right this is the
variable you're trying to predict
hopefully we all know that the equation
for a linear line in math is y = to mx +
C right I hope all of you remember math
so the equation for a linear line in
math is yal to MX plus C right similarly
the linear regression equation is
represented along the same line okay
yals to MX plus C there's just a little
bit of changes which I'll tell you what
they are let's understand this equation
properly all right so y basically stands
for your dependent variable that you're
going to predict okay B not is the Y Y
intercept now Y intercept is nothing but
this point here now in this graph you're
basically showing the relationship
between your dependent variable Y and
your independent variable X now this is
the linear relationship between these
two variables okay now your Y intercept
is basically the point on the line which
touches the Y AIS right this is your Y
intercept which is represented by B KN
okay now B1 or beta is the slope of this
line now the slope can either be
negative or positive depending on the
relationship between the dependent and
independent variable the next variable
that we have is X x here represents the
independent variable that is used to
predict our resultant output variable
basically X is used to predict the value
of y okay e here denotes the error in
the computation right for example this
is the actual line and these dots here
represent the predicted values now the
distance between these two is denoted by
the error in the computation so this is
the entire equation it's quite simple
right linear regression will basically
draw a relationship between your input
and your output variable right that's
how simple linear regression
works now to better understand linear
regression I'll be running a demo in
Python so guys before I get started with
our practical demo I'm assuming that
most of you have a good understanding of
python
right because explaining python is going
to be out of the scope of today's
session but if some of you are not
familiar with the Python language I'll
leave a couple of links in the
description box right those will be
related to Python Programming you can go
through those links understand Python
and then maybe try to understand the
demo but I'll be explaining the logic
part of the demo in depth right so the
main thing that we're going to do here
is try and understand linear regression
so it's okay if you do not understand
python for now I'll try to explain as
much as I can but if you still want to
understand this in a better way I'll
leave a couple of links in the
description box you can go through those
videos let me just zoom in for
you I hope all of you can see the
screen now in this linear regression
demo what we're going to do is we're
going to form a linear relationship
between the maxim temperature and
minimum temperature on a particular day
right which is going to do weather
forecasting here so our task is to
predict the maximum temperature taking
input feature as minimum temperature so
I'm just going to try and make you
understand linear regression through
this demo okay we'll see how it actually
works practically now before I get
started with the demo let me tell you
something about the data set now our
data set is uh stored in this path
basically right the name of the data set
is weather. CS
SV okay now this contains uh data on
weather conditions recorded on each day
at various weather stations around the
world okay the information includes
precipitation snowfall temperatures wind
speeds and whether the day included any
thunderstorm or other poor weather
conditions right so our first step in
any demo for that matter will be to
import all the libraries that are needed
right so we're going to begin our uh
demo by importing all all the required
libraries after that we're going to read
in our data right our data will be
stored in this variable called data set
and we're going to use a read. CSV
function since our since our data set is
in the CSV format right after that I'll
be showing you how the data set looks
right we'll also look at the data set in
depth now let me just show you the
output first right let's run this demo
and see
first all right we're getting a couple
of plots which I'll talk about in a
while so we can ignore this warning it
has nothing to do with so first of all
uh we're printing the shape of our data
set right so when we print the shape of
our data set this is the output that we
get so basically this shows that we have
around 12,000 uh rows and 31 columns in
our data set now the 31 columns
basically represent the predictor
variables so you can see that we have 31
predictor variables in order to predict
the weather conditions on a particular
dat so guys the main aim in this problem
statement is weather forecasting we're
going to predict the weather by using a
set of predictor variables right so
these are the different types of
predictor variables that we have okay we
have something known as maximum
temperature so this is what our data set
looks
like now what I'm doing in this block of
code is what we're doing is we're
plotting our data points on a 2d graph
in order to understand our data set and
see if we can manually find any
relationship between the variables here
we've taken a minimum temperature and uh
maximum temperature for doing our
analysis so let's just look at this plot
before that let me
just comment all of these other plots so
that you see only the graph that I'm
talking about
right so when you look at this graph
this is basically uh the graph between
your minimum temperature and your
maximum temperature maximum temperature
is our dependent variable that we're
going to predict right this is y and
your minimum temperature is your X it's
basically your independent variable so
if you look at this graph you can see
that there is a sort of linear
relationship between the two except
there are a little bit of outliers here
and there right there are a few data
points which are a little bit random but
apart from that there is a pretty linear
relationship between your minimum
temperature and your maximum temperature
all right so by this graph we can
understand that you can easily solve
this problem using linear regression
right because our data is very linear I
can see a clear straight line over here
this is our first
graph now next what I'm doing is I'm
just checking the uh average maximum
temperature that we have right I'm just
looking at the average of our output
variable okay so guys what we're doing
here right now is just exploratory data
analysis we're trying to understand our
data we're trying to see you know the
relationship between our input variable
and our output variable we're trying to
see the mean or the average of the
output variable all of this is necessary
to understand our data
set so this is what our average maximum
temperature looks like so if we try to
understand where exactly this is so our
average maximum temperature is somewhere
between
28 and I would say between 30 right 28
and 32 somewhere there so you can say
that our um average maximum temperature
lies between 25 and 35 right so that is
our average maximum temperature now that
you know a little bit about the data set
right you know that there's a very good
linear relationship between your input
variable and your output variable now
what you're going to do is uh you're
going to perform something known as data
splicing let me just comment that for
you this section is nothing but data
splicing so for those of you who are
paying attention know that data splicing
is nothing but splitting your data set
into training and testing data now
before we do that I mentioned earlier
that we'll be only using two variables
over here because we're trying to
understand the relationship between the
minimum temperature and maximum
temperature I'm doing this because I
want you to understand linear regression
in the simplest way possible so guys in
order to make you understand linear
regression I have just derived only two
variables from our data set even though
when we checked the structure of a data
set we had around 31 features meaning
that we had 31 variables which include
my predictor variable and my target
variable so basically we had 30
predictor variables and we had one
target variable which is your maximum
temperature right so what I'm doing here
is I'm only considering these two
variables because I want to show you
exactly how linear regression works so
here what I'm doing is I'm basically uh
extracting only these two variables from
our data set storing it in X and Y after
that I'm performing data splicing so
here I'm basically splitting the data
into training and testing data and
remember one point that I am assigning
20% of the data to our testing data set
and the remaining 80% is assigned for
training right that's how training works
we assign maximum data set for training
right we do this because we want the
machine learning model or the machine
learning algorithm to train better on
data we wanted to take as much as data
as possible so that it can predict the
outcome properly right so to repeat it
again for you so here we're just
splitting the data into training and
testing data set right so one more thing
to note here is that we're splitting uh
80% of the data for training and we're
assigning the 20% of the data to test
data the test size variable this
variable that you see is what is used to
specify the proportion of the test set
now after splitting the data into
training and testing set finally the
time is to train our algorithm for that
we need to import the linear regression
class we need to instantiate it and call
the fit method along with our training
data right this is our linear regression
class and we just creating an instance
of the linear regression class so guys a
good thing about python is that you have
predefined classes for your algorithms
right you don't have to sit and code
your algorithms instead all you have to
do is you have to call this class linear
regression class and you know you have
to create an instance of it here I'm
basically creating something known as a
regressor and all you have to do is you
have to call the fit method along with
your training data right so this is my
training data X train and Y train
contains my training data and I'm
calling our linear regression instance
which is regressor along with this data
set right so here here basically we are
building the model we're doing nothing
but building the model now one of the
major things that a linear regression
model does is it finds the best value
for the intercept and the slope which
results in a line that best fits the
data right I discuss what intercept and
slope is so if you want to see the
intercept and the slope calculated by
our linear regression model we just have
to run this line of code right and let's
look at the output for that right so our
intercept is is around 10.66 and our
coefficient or these are also known as
beta coefficients coefficient is nothing
but what we discussed beta not right
these are beta values now this will just
help you understand the significance of
your input variables all right now what
this coefficient value means is see the
coefficient value is around 0.92 right
this means that for every one unit
change of your minimum temperature the
change in the maximum temperature is
around
0.92 right this will just show you how
significant your input variable is right
so for every one unit change in your
minimum temperature the change in the
maximum temperature will be around
0.92 all right I hope you have
understood this part now that we've
trained our algorithm it's time to make
some predictions right to do so what
we'll do is we'll use our test data set
and we'll see how accurately our
algorithm predicts the percentage score
now to make prediction we have this line
of code predict is basically a
predefined function in Python and all
you're going to do is you're going to
pass your testing data set to this right
now what you'll do is you'll compare the
actual output values which is basically
stored in your y test right and uh
you'll compare these to the predicted
values which is in y prediction all
right and you'll store these comparisons
in a data frame right called DF and all
I'm doing here is I'm printing the data
frame so if you look at the output this
is what it looks like these are your
actual values and these are the values
that you predicted by building that
model right so if your actual value is
28 you predicted around 33 here your
actual value is 31 meaning that your
maximum temperature is 31 and you
predicted a maximum temperature of 30
now these values are actually pretty
close right I feel like the accuracy is
pretty good over here now in some cases
you see a lot of variance like 23 here
it's 15 right here it's 22 here it's 11
but such cases occur very often and the
best way to improve your accuracy I
would say is by training your model with
more data all right you can also view
this comparison in the form of a plot
right let's see how that
looks so basically this is a bar graph
that shows our actual values and our
predicted values blue is represented by
your actual values and orange is
represented by your predicted values at
places you can see that we've predicted
pretty well like the predictions are
pretty close to the actual values in
some cases the predictions are varying a
little bit so in a few places it is
actually varying but all of this depends
on your input data as well when we saw
the input data also we saw a lot of
variation right we saw a couple of
outliers so all that also might affect
your output right but guys this is how
you build machine learning models right
initially you never going to get a
really good accuracy what you have to do
is you have to improve your training
process that's the best way you can uh
predict better right either you use a
lot of data train your model with a lot
of data or you use other methods like
parameter tuning or basically you try
and find another predictor variable that
will help you more in predicting your
output right to me this looks pretty
good now let me show you another plot
here what we're doing is we are uh
drawing a straight line plot
okay let's see how it
looks so guys this trade line represents
a linear relationship now let's say you
get a new data point okay let's say the
value of x is around 20 so by using this
line You can predict that for a minimum
temperature of 20 your maximum
temperature will be around 25 or
something like that so we basically drew
a linear relationship between our input
and output variable over here now the
final step is to evaluate the
performance of the algorithm right this
step is particularly important to
compare how well different algorithms
perform on a particular data set now for
regression algorithms three evaluation
metrics are used we have something known
as mean absolute error mean squared
error and root mean squared error now
mean absolute error is nothing but the
absolute value of the errors right your
mean squared error is a mean of the
squared errors that's all it's basically
you read this and you understand what
the error means your root mean squared
error is the square root of the mean of
the squared errors okay so Guys these
are pretty simple to understand your
mean absolute error your mean squared
error your root mean squared error right
now luckily we don't have to perform
these calculations manually right we
don't have to code each of these
calculations the the cycle learn Library
comes with a pre-built functions that
can be used to find out these values
Okay so when you run this code you'll
get these values for each of the errors
right you'll get around 3.19 as the mean
absolute error your mean squared error
is around
17.63 your root mean squared error is
around
4.19 now these error values basically
show that our module accuracy is not
very precise right but it's still able
to make a lot of predictions right we
can draw a good linear relationship now
in order to improve the efficiency I
told you all there are a lot of methods
like this par parameter tuning and all
of that or basically you can train your
model with a lot more data apart from
that you can use other predictor
variables or maybe you can study the
relationship between other predictor
variables and your maximum temperature
variable right so there are a lot of
ways to improve the efficiency of the
model but for now I just wanted to make
you understand how linear regression
works and I hope all of you have a good
idea about this right I hope all of you
have a good understanding of how uh
linear regression works right this was a
small demo about it so if any of you
still have any doubts regarding linear
regression please leave that in the
comment section right we'll try and
solve all your errors so if you look at
this equation we calculated everything
here right we drew a relationship
between Y and X which is basically X was
our minimum temperature y was our
maximum temperature we also calculated
the slope and The Intercept right and we
also calculated the error in the end we
calculated mean squared error we
calculated the root mean Square error we
also calculated the mean absolute error
right so that was everything about
linear regression this was a simple
linear regression model right now let's
move on and look at our next algorithm
which is logistic
regression now in order to understand
why we use logistic regression let's
consider a small scenario all right
let's say that your little sister is
trying to get into grad school and you
want to predict whether she'll get
admitted in Her Dream school or or not
okay so based on her cgpa and the pass
data you can use logistic regression to
foresee the outcome right so logistic
regression will allow you to analyze a
set of variables and predict a
categorical outcome since here we need
to predict whether she will uh get into
a school or not which is a
classification problem logistic
regression will be used now I know the
first question in your head is why are
we not using linear regression in this
case the reason is that linear
regression is used to predict a
continuous quantity rather than a
categorical one here we're going to
predict whether or not your sister is
going to get into grad school right so
that is clearly a categorical outcome so
when the resultant outcome can take only
classes of values like two classes of
values it is sensible to have a model
that predicts the value as either zero
or one or in a probability form that
ranges between 0er and 1 okay so linear
regression does not have this ability if
you use linear regression to model a
binary outcome the resulting model will
not predict y values in the range of 0o
and one right because linear regression
works on continuous dependent variables
and not on categorical variables that's
why we make use of logistic regression
so understand that linear regression was
used to predict continuous quantities
and logistic regression is used to
predict categorical quantities okay now
one major confusion that everybody has
is people keep asking me why is logistic
regression called logistic regression
when it is used for classification the
reason it is named logistic regression
is because its primary technique is very
similar to linear regression okay
there's no other reason behind the
naming it belongs to the general linear
models okay it belongs to the same class
as linear regression but there's no
other reason behind the name logistic
regression logistic regression is mainly
used for classification purpose because
here you'll have to predict a dependent
variable which is categorical in nature
right so this is mainly used for
classification so to Define logistic
regression for you logistic regression
is a method used to predict a dependent
variable y given an independent variable
X such that the dependent variable is
categorical meaning that your output is
a categorical variable so obviously this
is a classification algorithm so guys
again to clear your confusion when I say
categorical variable I mean that it can
hold values like 1 or zero yes or no
true or false and so on right so
basically in logistic regression the
outcome is always
categorical now how does logistic
regression work so guys before I tell
you how logistic regression Works take a
look at this graph now I told you that
the outcome in a logistic regression is
categorical right your outcome will
either be zero or one or it'll be a
probability that ranges between 0o and
one so that's why we have this S curve
now some of you might think that why do
we have an S curve right we can't
obviously have a straight line we have
something known as a sigmoid curve
because we can have values ranging
between 0er and one which will basically
show the probability so maybe your
output will be
0.7 right which is a probability value
if it is 0.7 it means that your outcome
is basically one so that's why we have
this sigmoid curve like this okay now
I'll explain more about this in depth in
a while now in order to understand how
logistic regression works first let's
take a look at the linear regression
equation right this was the linear
regression equation that we discussed y
here stands for the dependent variable
that needs to be predicted beta KN is
nothing but the Y intercept beta 1 is
nothing but the slope and X represents
the independent variable that is used to
predict y right e denotes the error in
the computation so given the fact that X
is the independent variable and Y is the
dependent variable how can we represent
a relationship between X and Y such that
y ranges only between 0 and 1 here this
value basically denotes probability of y
equal to 1 given some value of x so here
basically this PR denotes probability
and this value basically denotes that
the probability of y equal to 1 given
some value of x right this is what we
need to find out now if you want to
calculate the probability using the
linear regression model then the
probability will look something like P
of x equal to Beta plus beta 1 into X
right P of X will be equal to Beta plus
beta 1 into X where P of X is nothing
but your probability of getting y equal
to 1 given some value of x so the
logistic regression equation is derived
from the same equation except we need to
make a few alterations because the
output is only categorical all right so
logistic regression does not necessarily
calculate the outcome as zero or one
right I mentioned this before only
instead it calculates the probability of
a variable falling in the class zero or
class one so that's why we can conclude
that the resultant variable must must be
positive and it should lie between 0 and
1 which means that it must be less than
one right so to meet these conditions we
have to do two things first we can take
the exponent of the equation because
taking an exponential of any value will
make sure that you get a positive number
correct secondly you have to make sure
that your output is less than one right
so a number divided by itself + one will
always be less than one so that's how we
get this formula First We Take the
exponent of the equation beta + beta 1 +
x and then we divide it by that number
plus one so this is how we get this
formula now the next step is to
calculate something known as the logit
function now the logic function is
nothing but it is a link function that
is represented as an S curve or as a
sigmoid curve that ranges between the
Valu 0 and 1 right it basically
calculates the probability of the output
variable so if you look at this equation
it's quite simple what we have done here
is we just cross multiply and take e to
the^ Beta plus beta 1 into X as common
right the rhs denotes the linear
equation for the independent variables
the LHS represents the odd ratio so if
you compute this entire thing you'll get
this final value which is basically your
logistic regression equation your rhs
here denotes the linear equation for
independent variables and your LHS
represents the odd ratio which is also
known as the logit function so I told
you that logit function is basically a
function that represents an S curve that
ranges between 0 and one right this will
make sure that our value ranges between
0 and one so in logistic regression on
increasing this x by one measure it
changes the loged by a factor of beta KN
is the same thing as I showed you in
linear regression so guys that's how you
derive the logistic regression equation
so if you have any doubts regarding
these equations please leave them in the
comment section and I'll get back to you
and I'll clear the doubts right so to
Summit up logistic regression is used
for classification the output variable
will always be a categorical variable we
also saw how you derived at the logistic
regression equation right and one more
important thing is that the relationship
between the variables in a logistic
regression is denoted as an S curve
which is also known as a sigmoid curve
and also the outcome does not
necessarily have to be calculated as
zero or one it can be calculated as a
probability that the output lies in
class one or class zero right so your
output can be a probability ranging
between 0o and one that's why we have a
Sig moint curve so I hope all of you are
clear with logistic regression now uh I
won't be showing you the demo right away
I'll explain a couple of more
classification algorithms then I'll show
you a practical demo where we'll use
multiple classification algorithms to
solve the same problem okay and we'll
also calculate the accuracy and see
which classification algorithm is doing
the best now the next algorithm I'm
going to talk about is decision tree
decision tree is one of my favorite
algorithms because it's very simple to
understand how a decision tree works so
guys uh before this we discussed linear
regression which is a regression
algorithm then we discuss logistic
regression which is a classification
algorithm remember don't get confused
just because it has the name logistic
regression okay it is a classification
algorithm now we discussing decision
tree which is again a classification
algorithm okay so what exactly is a
decision tree now a decision tree is
again a supervised machine learning
algorithm which looks like an inverted
tree where in each node represents a
predictor variable and the link between
the node represents a decision and each
Leaf node represents an outcome now I
know that's a little confusing so let me
make you understand what a decision tree
is with the help of an example let's say
that you hosted a huge party and you
want to know how many of your guests are
nonvegetarians so to solve this problem
you can create a simple decision tree
now if you look at this figure over here
I've created a decision tree that
classifies a guest as either vegetarian
or nonvegetarian right our last outcome
here is nonv or veg right so here only
you understand that this is a
classification algorithm because here
you're predicting a categorical value
each node over here represents a
predictor variable so eat chicken is one
variable eat mutton is one variable
Seafood is another variable right so
each node represents a predictor
variable that will help you conclude
whether or not a guest is a
non-vegetarian now as you Traverse down
the tree you'll make decisions at each
node until you reach the dead end
okay that's how it works so let's say we
got a new data point now we'll pass it
through the decision tree the first
variable is did the guest eat the
chicken if yes then he's a
non-vegetarian if no then you'll pass it
to the next variable which is did the
guest eat mutton if yes then he's a
non-vegetarian if no then you'll pass it
to the next variable which is seafood if
he ate Seafood then he is a
nonvegetarian if no then he's a
vegetarian right this is how a decision
tree works it's a very simple algorithm
that you can easily understand right it
is drawn out like this which is very
easy to understand now let's understand
the structure of a decision tree I just
showed you an example of how the
decision tree works now let me take the
same example and tell you the structure
of a decision tree so first of all we
have something known as the root node
okay the root node is the starting point
of a decision tree here you'll perform
the first split and split into two other
nodes or three other nodes depending on
your problem statement right so the
topmost node is known as your root node
right now guys about the root node the
root node is assigned to a variable that
is very significant meaning that that
variable is very important in predicting
the output okay so you assign a variable
that you think is the most significant
at the root node after that we have
something known as internal nodes so
each internal node represents a decision
point that eventually leads to the
output right internal nodes will have
other predictor variables right each of
these are nothing but predictor
variables I've just made it into a
question otherwise these are just
predictor variables right those are
internal nodes terminal nodes also known
as the leaf node represent the final
class of the output variable okay so
these are basically your outcomes nonv
and vegetarian branches are nothing but
connections between nodes okay these
connections or links between each node
is known as a branch and they are
represented by arrows so each branch
will have some response to it either yes
or no true or false one or zero and so
on okay so guys this is the structure of
a decision Tre it's pretty
understandable now let's move on and
we'll understand how the decision Tre
algorithm
works now there are many ways to build a
decision tree but uh I'll be focusing on
something known as the ID3 algorithm
okay there's something known as ID3
algorithm that is one of the ways in
which you can build the decision tree
ID3 stands for iterative dichotomize
three algorithm which is one of the most
effective algorithms used to build a
decision tree all right it uses the
concepts of entropy and Information Gain
in order to build a decision tree now
you don't have to know what exactly the
ID3 algorithm is it's just a concept
behind building a decision tree now the
ID3 algorithm has around six defined
steps in order to build a decision tree
so the first step is you will select the
best attribute now what do you mean by
the best attribute so attribute is
nothing but the predictor variable over
here right so you'll select the best
predictor variable let's call it a after
that you'll assign this a as a decision
variable for the root node basically
you'll assign this predictor variable a
at the root node next what you'll do is
for each value of a you'll build a
descendant of the node now these three
steps let's look at it with the previous
example now here the best attribute is
eat chicken okay this is my best
attribute variable over here so I
selected that attribute and what was the
next step step two is assign that as a
decision variable so I assigned eat
chicken as the decision variable at the
root node now you might be wondering how
do I know which is the best attribute
right I'll explain all of that in a
while so what we did is we assigned this
at the root node after that step number
three says for each value of a build a
descendant of the node so for each value
of this variable build a descendant node
so this variable can take two values yes
and no so for each of these values I
build a descendant node right step
number four assign classification labels
to the leaf node to your Leaf node I
have assigned classification one is non-
wedge and the other is wedge that is
Step number four step number five is if
data is correctly classified then you
stop at that however if it is not then
you keep iterating over the tree and you
keep changing the position of the uh
predictor variables in the tree or you
change the root node also in order to
get the correct output so now let me
answer this question what is the best
attribute what do you mean by the best
attribute or the best predictor variable
now the best attribute is the one that
separates the data into different
classes most effectively or it is
basically a feature that best splits the
data set right now the next question in
your head must be how do I decide which
variable or which feature best splits
the data to do this there are two
important measures right there's
something known as Information Gain and
there's something known as entropy now
guys in order to understand Information
Gain and entropy we look at a simple
problem statement this data set
represents the speed of a car based on
certain parameters so our problem
statement here is to study the data set
and create a decision tree that
classifies the speed of a car as either
slow or fast so a predictor variables
here are Road type obstruction and speed
limit and our response variable or our
output variable is speed so we'll be
building a decision tree using these
variables in order to predict the speed
of a car now like I mentioned earlier we
must first begin by deciding a variable
that best splits the data set and assign
that particular variable to the root
node and repeat the same thing for other
nodes as well all right so step one like
we discussed earlier is to select the
best attribute a now how do you know
which variable best separates the data
the variable with the highest
Information Gain best divides the data
into the desired output classes first of
all we'll calculate two measures we'll
calculate the entropy and the
information gain now this is where I
tell you what exactly entropy is and
what exactly Information Gain Is Now
entropy is basically um used to measure
the impurity or the uncertainty present
in the data all right it is used to
decide how a decision tree can split the
data Information Gain on on the other
hand is the most significant measure
which is used to build a decision tree
it indicates how much information a
particular variable gives us about the
final outcome so Information Gain is
important because it is used to choose a
variable that best splits the data at
each node for a decision tree now the
variable with the highest Information
Gain will be used to split the data at
the root node now in our data set there
are four observations right so what
we're going to do is we'll start by
calculating the entropy and Information
Gain for each of the predictor variable
so we're going to start by calculating
the information gain and entropy for the
road type variable in our data set you
can see that there are four observations
right there are four observations in the
road type column which correspond to the
four labels in the speed column so we're
going to begin by calculating the
information gain of the parent node the
parent node is nothing but the speed of
the car node this is our output variable
correct it'll be used used to show
whether the uh speed of the car is low
or fast so to find out the information
gain of the uh speed of the car variable
we'll go through a couple of steps now
we know that there are four observations
in this parent node right there is first
we have slow then again we have slow
fast and Fast now out of these four
observations we have two classes right
so two observations belong to the class
low and two observations belong to the
class fast
so that's how you calculate P slow and P
fast P slow is nothing but the fraction
of slow outcomes in the parent node and
P fast is a fraction of fast outcomes in
the parent node and the formula to
calculate P slow is the number of slow
outcomes in the parent node divided by
the total number of outcomes so the
number of slow outcomes in the parent
node is two and the total number of
outcomes is four right we have four
observations in total so that's how we
get p of slow as
0.5 similarly for p of fast you'll
calculate the number of fast outcomes
divided by the total number of outcomes
so again 2x 4 you'll get
0.5 the next thing you'll do is you'll
calculate the entropy of this node so to
calculate the entropy this is the
formula all you have to do is you have
to substitute the form you'll have to
substitute the value in this formula
right so P of slow we're substituting as
0.5 similarly P of fast as 0.5 now when
you substitute the value you'll get a
answer of one right so the entropy of
your parent node is one so after
calculating the entropy of the parent
node we'll calculate the information
gain of the child node now guys remember
that if the information gain of the road
type variable is greater than the
information gain of all the other
predictor variables only then the root
node can be split by using the road type
variable so to calculate the information
gain of road type variable we first need
to split the root node by using the road
type variable right we is doing this in
order to check if the road type variable
is giving us maximum information about
our data okay so if you notice that road
type has two outcomes it has two values
either steep or flat right now go back
to our data set so here what you have to
notice is whenever the row type is steep
so first what we'll do is we'll check uh
the value of speed that we get when the
road type is steep so first observation
you see that whenever the road type is
steep you're getting a speed of slow
similarly in the second observation when
the row type is steep you'll get a value
of slow again if the row type is flat
you'll get an observation of fast and
again if it is steep there is a value of
fast right so for three steep values we
have slow slow and fast and when the row
type is flat we get an output of fast
right that's exactly what I've done in
this decision tree so whenever the road
type is steep you'll get slow slow or
fast and whenever the road type is flat
you'll get fast right now the entropy of
the right hand side is zero entropy is
nothing but the uncertainty there's no
uncertainty over here because as soon as
you see that the road type is flat your
output is fast right so there's no
uncertainty but when the row type is
steep you can have any one of the
following outcomes either your speed
will be slow or it can be fast right so
you'll start by calculating the entropy
of both rhs and LHS of the decision tree
so the entropy for the right side child
node will be zero right because there's
no uncertainty here immediately if you
see that the road type is flat your uh
speed of the car will be fast okay so
there's no uncertainty here and
therefore your entropy becomes zero now
entropy for the left hand side is you'll
again have to calculate the fraction of
P slow and the fraction of P fast so out
of three observations in two
observations we have slow that's why we
have 2x3 over here similarly for p fast
we have one p fast divided by the total
number of observations which are three
so out of these three we have two slows
and one fast right when you calculate P
slow and P fast you'll get these two
values and then when you substitute the
entropy in this formula you'll get the
entropy as 0.9 for the road type
variable right I hope you all are
understanding this I'll go through this
again so basically here we calculating
the information gain and entropy for
Road type variable right whenever you
consider Road type variable there are
two values Steep and flat and whenever
the value for Road type is steep you'll
get any one of these three outcomes
either you'll get slow slow or fast and
when the road type is flat your outcome
will be fast now because there's no
uncertainty whenever the road type is
flat you'll always get an outcome of
fast this means that the entropy here is
zero or the uncertainty value here is
zero but here there is a lot of
uncertainty right so whenever your road
type is steep your output can either be
slow or it can be fast so finally you
get the entropy as
0.9 so in order to calculate the
information gain of the road type
variable you need to calculate the
weighted average right I'll tell you why
in order to calculate the Information
Gain you need to know the entropy of the
parent which we calculated as one minus
the weighted average into the entropy of
the children okay so for this formula
you need to calculate all of these
values so first of all you need to
calculate the entropy of the weighted
average now the total number of outcomes
in the parent node we saw were four the
total number of outcomes in the left
child node were three and the total
number of outcomes in the right child
node was one correct in order to verify
this with you yeah the total number of
outcomes in the parent node are four
right 1 2 3 and four coming to the child
node which is the road type the total
number of outcomes on the right hand
side of the child node is one and the
total number of outcomes on the left
hand side of the child node is three
right that's exactly what I've written
over here all right I hope you all
understood these three values after that
all you have to do is you have to
substitute these values in this formula
so when you do that you'll get the
entropy of the children with weighted
average will be around
0.675 all right now just substitute the
value in this formula so if you
calculate the information gain of the
road type variable you'll get a value of
0.325 Now by using the same method
you're going to calculate the
information gain for each of the
predictor variable for Road type for
obstruction and for speed limit now when
you follow the same method and you
calculate the Information Gain you'll
get these values now what does this
information gain for Road type equal to
0.325 denote now the value 0.325 for
Road type denotes that we getting very
little Information Gain from this row
type variable and for obstruction we
literally have a Information Gain of
zero similarly Information Gain for
speed limit is one now this is the
highest value we've got for Information
Gain this means that we'll have to use
the speed limit variable at our root
node in order to split the data set
right so guys don't get conf confuse
whichever variable gives you the maximum
Information Gain that variable has to be
chosen at the root node so that's why we
have the root node as speed limit so if
you've maintained the speed limit then
you're going to go slow but if you
haven't maintained the speed limit then
the speed of your car is going to be
fast all right your entropy is literally
zero and your Information Gain is one
meaning that you can use this variable
at your root node in order to split the
data set because spe spe limit gives you
the maximum Information Gain so guys I
hope this use case is clear to all of
you to sum everything up I'll just
repeat the entire thing to you all once
more so basically here you were given a
problem statement in order to create a
decision tree that classifies the speed
of a car as either slow or fast right so
you were given three predictor variables
and this was your output variable
Information Gain and entropy are
basically two measures that are used to
decide which variable will be assigned
to the the root node of a decision tree
okay so guys as soon as you look at the
data set if you compare these two
columns that is speed limit and speed
you'll get an output easily meaning that
if you're maintaining speed limit you're
going to go slow but if you aren't
maintaining speed limit you're going to
go fast right so here itself you can
understand that speed limit has no
uncertainty so every time you've
maintained your speed limit you will be
going slow and every time you're outside
your speed limit you will be going fast
all right it's as simple as that so how
did you
start so you started by calculating the
entropy of the parent node okay you
calculated the entropy of the parent
node which came down to one okay after
that you calculated the information gain
of each of the child nodes in order to
calculate the information gain of the
child node you start by calculating the
entropy of the right hand side and the
left hand side of the decision tree okay
then you calculate the entropy along
with the weighted average you substitute
these values in the Information Gain
formula and you get the information gain
for each of the predictor variables so
after you get the information gain of
each of the predictor variables you
check which variable gives you the
maximum Information Gain and you assign
that variable to your root node it's as
simple as that so guys that was all
about decision trees now let's look at
our next classification algorithm which
is random Forest now first of all what
is a random Forest random Forest
basically builds multiple decision trees
and glues them together to get a more
accurate and stable prediction now if we
already have decision trees and random
Forest is nothing but a collection of
decision trees why do we have to use
random Forest when we already have
decision trees the three main reasons
why random Forest is used now even
though decision trees are convenient and
easily implemented they are not as
accurate as random Forest okay decision
trees work very effectively with the
training data but they're not flexible
when it comes to classifying a new
sample right now this happens because of
something known as overfitting now
overfitting is a problem that is seen
with decision trees okay it's something
that commonly occurs when you use
decision trees now overfitting occurs
when a model studies the training data
to such an extent that it negatively
influences the performance of the model
on the new data
all right now this means that the
disturbance in the training data is
recorded and it is learned as concepts
by the model if there's any disturbance
or any sort of noise in the training
data or any error in the training data
that is also studied by the model the
problem here is that these Concepts do
not apply to the testing data and it
negatively impacts the model's ability
to classify new data so to Summit up
overfitting occurs whenever your your
model learns the training data along
with all the disturbance in the training
data so it's basically memorized the
training data and whenever a new data
will be given to your model it will not
predict the outcome very accurately now
this is a problem seen in decision trees
okay but in random Forest there's
something known as bagging now the basic
idea behind bagging is to reduce the
variations in the predictions by
combining the result of multiple
decision trees on different samples of
the data set set so your data set will
be divided into different samples and
you'll be building a decision Tree on
each of these samples this way each
decision tree will be studying one
subset of your data so this way
overfitting will get reduced because one
decision tree is not studying the entire
data set right now let's focus on random
Forest now in order to understand random
Forest we look at a small example okay
consider this data set in this data we
have four predictor variables we have
blood flow blocked arteries chest pain
and weight now these variables are used
to predict whether or not a person has a
heart disease so we're going to use this
data set to create a random Forest that
predicts if a person has a heart disease
or not now the first step in creating a
random Forest is that you create a
bootstrapped data set now in
bootstrapping all you have to do is you
have to randomly select samples from
your original data set okay and a point
to note is that you can select select
the same sample more than once all right
so if you look at the original data set
we have abnormal normal Normal and
abnormal right look at the blood flow
section now here I've randomly selected
samples normal abnormal and I've
selected one sample twice all right you
can do this in a bootstrap data set now
all I did here is I created a bootstrap
data set bootstrapping is nothing but an
estimation method used to make
predictions on a data by resampling the
data right this is a bootstrap data set
now even though this seems very simple
in real world problems you'll never get
such a small data set okay so
bootstrapping is actually a little more
complex than this usually in real world
problems you have a huge data set and
bootstrapping that data set is actually
a pretty complex problem now here
because I'm making you understand how
random Forest works so that's why I've
considered a small data set now you're
going to use the bootstrap data set that
you created and you're going to build
dis trees from it now one more thing to
note in random Forest is you will not be
using your entire data set okay so
you'll only be using few of the
variables at each node so for example uh
we'll only consider two variables at
each step so if we begin at the root
node here we will randomly select two
variables as candidates for the root
node okay let's say that we selected
blood flow and blocked arteries right
out of these two variables we have to
select the variable that best separates
the sample
okay so for the sake of this example
let's say that blocked arteries is a
most significant predictor and that's
why we'll assign it to the root node now
our next step is to repeat the same
process for each of these upcoming
Branch nodes here we'll again select two
variables at random as candidates for
each of these Branch nodes and then
choose a variable that best separates
the samples right so let me just repeat
this entire process so you know that you
start creating a decision Tree by
selecting the root node in random Forest
you'll randomly select a couple of
variables for each node and then you'll
calculate which variable best splits the
data at that node so for each node we'll
randomly select two or three variables
and out of those two three variables
we'll see which variable best separates
the data okay so at each node we'll be
calculating Information Gain and entropy
basically that's what I mean at every
node you'll calculate Information Gain
and entropy of two or three variables
and you'll see which variable has has
the highest Information Gain and you'll
keep descending downwards that's how you
create a decision dream so we just
created our first decision tree now what
you do is you'll go back to step one and
you'll repeat the entire process so each
decision tree will predict the output
class based on the predictor variables
that you have assigned to each decision
tree now let's say for this decision
tree you have assigned blood flow here
we have blocked arteries at the root
node here we might have blood flow at
the root node and so on so your output
will depend on which predictor variable
is at the root node right so each
decision tree will predict the output
class based on the predictive variable
that you assigned in that tree all right
now what you do is you'll go back to
step one you'll create a new bootstrap
data set and then again you'll build a
new decision tree and for that decision
tree you'll consider only a subset of
variables and you'll choose the best
predictor variable by calculating the
information gain right so you'll keep
repeating this process so you just keep
repeating step two and step one okay and
you'll keep creating multiple decision
trees okay so having a variety of
decision trees in a random Forest is
what makes it more effective than an
individual decision tree right so
instead of having a individual decision
tree which is created using all the
features you can build a random Forest
that uses multiple decision trees where
in each decision tree has a random set
of predictor variables now step number
four is predicting the outcome of a new
data point so now that you've created a
random Forest let's see how it can be
used to predict whether a new patient
has a heart disease or not okay now this
diagram basically has the data about the
new patient okay this is the data about
the new patient he doesn't have blocked
arteries he has chest pain and his
weight is around 185 kgs now all you
have to do is you have to run this data
down each of the decision trees that you
have made so the first decision tree
shows that yes this person has heart
disease similarly you'll run the
information of this new patient through
every decision tree that you created
then depending on how many votes you get
for yes and no you will classify that
patient as either having heart disease
or not all you have to do is you have to
run the information of the new patient
through all the decision trees that you
created in the previous step and the
final output is based on the number of V
what's each of the classes getting okay
let's say that three decision trees said
that yes the patient has heart disease
and one decision tree said that no it
doesn't have so this means you will
obviously classify the patient as having
a heart disease because three of them
voted for yes right it's based on
majority all right so guys I hope the
concept behind random Forest is
understandable now the next step is you
will evaluate the efficiency of the
model now earlier when we created uh the
bootstrap data set we left out one entry
sample right this is the entry sample we
left out because we repeated one sample
twice if you all remember in the
bootstrap data set here we repeated an
entry twice and we missed out on one of
the entries right we missed out on one
of the entries so what we're going to do
is so for evaluating the model we'll be
using the data entry that we missed out
on okay now in a real world problem
about 1/3 of the original data set is is
not included in the bootstrap data set
right because there's a huge amount of
data in a real world problem so 1/3 of
the original data set is not included in
the bootstrap data set so guys the
sample data set which is not there in
your bootstrap data set is known as out
of bag data set okay so basically this
is our out of bag data set now the out
of bag data set is used to check the
accuracy of the model now because the
model was not created by using the out
ofb data set it will give us a good
understanding of whether the model is
effective or not now the out ofb data
set is nothing but your testing data set
right remember in machine learning
there's training and testing data set so
your OU ofb data set is nothing but your
testing data set this is used to
evaluate the efficiency of your model So
eventually you can measure the accuracy
of a random Forest by the proportion of
out of bag samples that are correctly
classified right because the outou of
bag data set is used to evaluate the
efficiency of your model so you can
calculate the accuracy by understanding
how many samples was this out ofb data
set correctly able to
classify so guys that was an explanation
about how random Forest Works to give
you an overview let me just run you
through all the steps that we took so
basically this was our data set and all
we have to do is we have to predict
whether a patient has heart disease or
not so our first step was to create a
boot strap data set a bootstrap data set
is nothing but randomly selected
observations from your original data set
and you can also have duplicate values
in your bootstop data set okay the next
step is you're going to create a
decision Tree by considering a random
set of predictor variables for each
decision tree okay so the third step is
you'll go back to Step One create a
bootstrap data set again create a
decision tree so this iteration is
performed hundreds of times until you
have multiple decision trees right now
that you've created a random Forest
you'll use this random Forest to predict
the outcome so if you're given a new
data point and you have to classify it
into one of the two classes you'll just
run this new information through all the
decision treats and you'll just take the
majority of the output that you're
getting from the decision trees as your
outcome now in order to evaluate the
efficiency of the model you'll use the
out of the bag sample data set right now
the out of bag sample is basically the
sample that was not included in your
bootstrap data set but this sample is
coming from your original data set guys
this is not something that you randomly
create all right this data set was there
in your original data set but it was
just not mentioned in your bootstrap
data set right so you'll use your out of
bag sample in order to calculate the
accuracy of your random Forest right so
the proportion of out of bag samples
that are correctly classified will give
you the accuracy of your model so that
is all for random for Forest so guys
I'll discuss other classification
algorithms with you and only then I'll
show you a demo on the classification
algorithms right now our next algorithm
is something known as KN bias right KN
bias is again a supervised uh
classification algorithm which is based
on the base theorem now the base theorem
basically follows a probabilistic
approach the main idea behind knif bias
is that the predictor variables in a
machine Lear learning model are
independent of each other meaning that
the outcome of a model depends on a set
of independent variables that have
nothing to do with each other right now
a lot of you might ask why is naive bias
called naive now usually when I tell
anybody about naive bias they keep
asking me why is naive bias called naive
so in real world problems predictor
variables aren't always independent of
each other there is always some
correlation between the independent
variables now because naive bias
considers each predictor variable to be
independent of any other variable in the
model it is called naive right this is
an assumption that naive bias takes now
let's understand the math behind the
naive bias algorithm so like I mentioned
the principle behind naive bias is the
bias theorem which is also known as a
bias rule okay the bias theorem is used
to calculate the conditional probability
which is nothing but the probability of
a an event occurring based on
information about the events in the past
right this is the mathematical equation
uh for the bias theorem now in this
equation the LHS is nothing but the
conditional probability of event a
occurring given the event B P of a is
nothing but probability of event a
occurring P of B is probability of event
B and PB of a is nothing but the
conditional probability of event B
occurring given the event a
now let's try to understand how naive
bias works now consider this data set of
around 1,500 observations okay here we
have the following output classes we
have either cat parrot or Turtle okay
these are our output classes and the
predictive variables are uh swim Wings
green color and sharp teeth okay so
basically your type is your output
variable and swim Wings Green and sharp
teeth are your predictor variables your
output variable has three classes cat
parrot and turtle okay now I've
summarized this table as shown on the
screen all right the first thing you can
see is the class of type cats shows that
out of 500 cats 450 can swim right
meaning that 90% of them can and zero
number of cats have wings and zero
number of cats are green in color and
500 out of 500 cats have sharp te teeth
okay now coming to parrots it says 50
out of 500 parrots have true value for
swim now guys obviously this does not
hold true in real world right I don't
think there are any parrots who can swim
but I've just created this data set so
that you can understand naive bias right
so meaning that 10% of parrots have true
value for swim now all 500 parrots have
wings and 400 out of 500 parrots are
green in color and zero parrots have
sharp teeth right coming to the turtle
class all 500 Turtles can swim zero
number of turtles have wings and out of
500 100 Turtles are green in color
meaning that uh 20% of the turtles are
green in color and 50 out of 500 turtles
have sharp teeth right so that's what we
understand from this data set now the
problem here is we given a observation
over here okay we given some value for
swim Wings Green and sharp teeth what we
need to do is we need to predict whether
the animal is a cat parrot or a turtle
based on these values right so the goal
here is to predict whether it is a cat
parrot or a turtle based on all these
defined parameters okay based on the
value of swim Wings Green and sharp
teeth we'll understand whether the
animal is a cat or is it a parrot or is
it a turtle so if you look at the
observation the variables swim and green
have a value of true right and the
outcome can be any one of the types it
can either be a cat it can be a parrot
or it can be a turtle so in order to
check if the animal is a cat all you
have to do is you have to calculate the
conditional probability at each step so
here what we're doing is we need to
calculate the probability that this is a
cat given that it can swim and it is
green in color first we'll calculate the
probability that it can swim given that
it's a cat into the probability that it
is green and the probability of it being
green given that it is a cat and then
we'll multiply it with the probability
of it being a cat divided by the
probability of swim and green okay so
guys I know you can calculate the
probability it's quite simple so once
you calculate the probability here
you'll get a direct value of zero okay
you'll get a value of zero meaning that
this animal is definitely not a cat
similarly if you do this for p you
calculate the conditional probability
you'll get a value of
0.264 divided by probability of swim
comma green right we don't know this
probability similarly if you check this
for the turtle you'll get a probability
of 0.066 divided by P swim comma green
okay now for these calculations the
denominator is the same right the value
of the denominator is the same and the
value of and the probability of of it
being a turtle is greater than that of a
parrot right so that's how we can
correctly predict that the animal is
actually a turtle all right so guys this
is how knife bias works you basically
calculate the conditional probability at
each step whatever classification needs
to be done that has to be calculated
through probability there's a lot of
statistic that comes into knif bias and
if youall want to learn more about
statistics and probability I'll leave a
link in the description you can watch
that video as well right there have
explained exactly what conditional
probability is and the bias theorem is
also explained very well so you all can
check out that video also and apart from
this if youall have any doubts regarding
any of the algorithms please leave them
in the comment section okay I'll solve
your doubts and apart from that I'll
also leave a couple of links for each of
the algorithms in the description box
because if you want more in-depth
understanding of each of the algorithms
you can check out that content right
since this is full course video I have
to cover all the topics and it is hard
for me to make you understand in-depth
of each topic right so I'll leave a
couple of links in the description box
you can watch those videos as well right
make sure you check out the probability
and statistics video all right so now
let's move on and look at our next
algorithm which is the K nearest
neighbor
algorithm now KNN which basically stands
for K nearest neighbor is again a
supervised classification algorithm that
classifies a new new data point into the
target class or the output class
depending on the features of its
neighboring data points right that's why
it's called K nearest neighbor so let's
try to understand KNN with a small
analogy okay let's say that we want a
machine to distinguish between the
images of cats and dogs so to do this we
must input a data set of cat and dog
images and we have to train a model to
detect the animal based on certain
features okay for example features such
as pointy ears can be used to identify
cats right similarly we can identify
dogs based on their long years so after
studying the data set during the
training phase when a new image is given
to the model the KE and algorithm will
classify it into either cats or dogs
depending on the similarity in their
features okay let's say that a new image
has pointy ears it would classify that
image as cat because it is similar to
the cat image es because it's similar to
its neighbors in this manner the KNN
algorithm classifies the data points
based on how similar they are to their
neighboring data points right so this is
a small example we'll discuss more about
it in the further slides now let me tell
you a couple of features of KNN
algorithm so first of all we know that
it is a supervised learning algorithm it
uses labeled input data set to predict
the output of the data points then it is
also one of the simplest machine
learning algorithms and it can be easily
implemented for a varied set of problems
another feature is that it is
non-parametric meaning that it does not
take in any assumptions for example
knife bias is a parametric model because
it assumes that all the independent
variables are in no way related to each
other right it has assumptions about the
model K's neighbor has no such
assumptions that's why it's considered a
non-parametric model another feature is
that it is a lazy algorithm
now lazy algorithm basically is any
algorithm that memorizes the training
set instead of learning a discriminative
function from the training data okay now
even though knnn is mainly a
classification algorithm it can also be
used for regression cases right so KNN
is actually both a classification and a
regression algorithm but mostly you'll
see that it'll be used only for
classification problems the most
important Fe feature about Karis
neighbor is that it's based on feature
similarity with its neighboring data
points all right you'll understand this
in the example that I'm going to tell
you now in this image we have two
classes of data right we have class A
which is squares and Class B which are
triangles now the problem statement is
to assign the new input data point to
one of the two classes by using the KNN
algorithm so the first step in the KNN
algorithm is to define the value of K
but what does the K in the KNN algorithm
stand for now the K stands for the
number of nearest neighbors and that's
why it's got the name k nearest
neighbors right now in this image I've
defined the value of K as three this
means that the algorithm will consider
the three neighbors that are closest to
the new data point in order to decide
the class of the new data point so the
closest between the data point is
calculated by using measure such as ukan
distance and Manhattan distance which
I'll be explaining in a while so at K is
equal to 3 the neighbors include two
squares and one triangle so if I were to
classify the new data point based on k
equal to 3 then it should be assigned to
class a correct it should be assigned to
squares but what if the K value is set
to seven here I'm basically telling my
algorithm to look for the seven nearest
neighbors and classify the new data
point into the class it is most similar
to right so at k equal to 7 the
neighbors include three squares and four
triangles so if I were to classify the
new data point based on k equal to 7
then it would be assigned to class B
Since U majority of its neighbors are
from class B now this is where a lot of
us get confused right so how do we know
which K value is the most suitable for
K's neighbor now there are a couple of
methods used to calculate the K value
one of them is known as the elbow elow
method right we'll be discussing the
elbow method in the upcoming slides okay
so for now let me just show you uh the
measures that are involved behind K&N
okay there's very simple math behind the
korus neighbor algorithm so I'll be
discussing the ukan distance with you
now in this figure we have to measure
the distance between P1 and P2 by using
ukan distance I'm sure a lot of you
already know what ukan distance is it is
something that we learned in eth or 10th
grade I'm not sure right so all you're
doing is you're extracting X1 so the
formula is basically X2 - X1 the whole s
+ Y2 - y1 the whole square and the root
of that is your ukian distance right
it's as simple as that so ukian distance
is used as a measure to check the
closeness of data points right so
basically KNN uses the ukan distance to
check the closeness of a new data point
with its neighbors so guys it's as
simple as that Cann makes use of simple
measures in order to solve very complex
problems okay this is one of the reasons
why KNN is such a commonly used
algorithm coming to support Vector
machines now this is our last algorithm
under classification algorithms now guys
don't get paranoid because of the name
support Vector machine actually is one
of the simplest algorithms in supervised
learning okay it is basically used to
classify data into different classes
right it's a classification algorithm
now unlike most algorithms spvm makes
use of something known as a hyper plane
which acts like a decision boundary
between the separate classes okay now
svm can be used to generate multiple
separating hyperplanes such that the
data is divided into segments and each
segment contains only one kind of data
so a few features of svm include that it
is a supervised learning algorithm
meaning that it's going to study a
labeled training data another feature is
that it is again a regression and a
classification algorithm even though
spvm is mainly used for classification
there is something known as the support
Vector regressor right that is used for
regression problems now svm can also be
used to classify nonlinear data by using
kernel dcks nonlinear data is basically
data that cannot be separated by using a
single linear line I'll be talking more
about this in the upcoming slides now
let's move on and discuss how svm works
now again in order to make you
understand how support Vector machine
works we look at a small scenario okay
for a second pretend that you own a farm
and you have a problem okay you need to
set up a fence to protect your rabbits
from a pack of wolves okay now you need
to decide where you want to build your
fence so one way to solve the problem is
by using support Vector machines right
so if I do that and if I try to draw a
decision boundary between the rabbits
and the Wolves it looks something like
this right now you can clearly build a
fence along this line so in simple terms
this is exactly how your support Vector
machines work it draws a decision
boundary which is nothing but a hyper
plane between any two classes in order
to separate them or classify them now I
know that you're thinking how do you
know where to draw a hyperplane now the
basic principle behind svm is to draw a
hyper plane that best separates the two
classes in our case the two classes are
the rabbits and the Wolves all right now
before we move any further let's discuss
the different terminologies that are
there in support Vector machines so that
is basically a hyperplane it is a
decision boundary that best separates
the two classes right now support
vectors what exactly are support vectors
so when you start with the support
Vector machine you start by drawing a
random hyper plane and then you check
the distance between the hyper plane and
the closest data points from each of the
class right these closest data points to
the hyper plane are known as support
vectors right these two data points are
the closest to your hyper plane so these
are known as support vectors and that's
where the name comes from support Vector
machines now the hyper plane is drawn
based on these support vectors and uh an
Optimum hyper plane will be the one
which has a maximum distance from each
of the support vectors meaning that the
distance between the hyperplane and the
support vectors has to be maximum right
so to Summit up spvm is used to classify
data by using a hyper plane such that
the distance between the hyper plane and
the support Vector is maximum now this
distance is nothing but the margin now
let's try to solve a problem right let's
say that I input a new data point and I
want to draw a hyper plane such that it
best separates these two classes so what
do I do I start off by drawing a hyper
plane and then I check the distance
between the hyper plane and the support
vectors so basically here I'm trying to
check if the margin is maximum for this
hyper plane but what if I drew the hyper
plane like this the margin for this
hyper plane is clearly way more than the
previous one so this is my optimal
hyperplane right this is exactly how you
understand which hyper plane needs to be
chosen because you can from multiple
hyperplanes now the best hyper plane is
the one that has a maximum margin so
this is my optimal hyper plane now so
far it was quite easy right our data was
linearly separable which means that you
could draw a straight line to separate
the two classes but what will you do if
the data looks like this you possibly
cannot draw a hyperplane like this you
possibly cannot draw a hyper plane like
this right it doesn't separate the two
classes we you can clearly see rabbits
and wolves in both of the classes now
this is exactly where nonlinear spvm
comes into the picture okay this is what
the kernel trick is all about now kernel
is basically uh something that can be
used to transform data into another
dimension that has a clear dividing
margin between classes of data so
basically the kernel function offers the
user the option of transforming
nonlinear spaces into linear ones so
until this point if you notice that we
were plotting our data on two
dimensional space right we had X and Y
AIS a simple trick is transforming the
two variables X and Y into a new feature
space which involves a new variable Zed
so basically what we're doing is we're
visualizing the data on a
three-dimensional space so when you
transform the 2D space into a 3D space
you can clearly see a dividing margin
between the two classes of data right
you can clearly draw a line in the
middle that separates these two data
sets right so guys this sums up the
whole idea behind support Vector
machines support Vector machines are
very easy to understand right now this
was all for our supervised learning
algorithms now before I move on to
unsupervised learning algorithms I'll be
running a demo right we'll be running a
demo in order to understand all the
classification algorithms that we
studied so far earlier in the session we
ran a demo for the regression algorithms
now we'll run for the classification
algorithms right so enough of theory
let's open up Python and let's start
looking at how these classification
algorithms work now here what we'll be
doing is we'll Implement multiple
classification algorithms by using the
cych learn okay it's one of the most
popular machine learning tool for python
now we'll be using a simple data set for
the task of uh training a classifier to
distinguish between the different types
of fruits the purpose of this demo is to
implement uh multiple classification
algorithms for the same set of problem
so as usual you start by importing all
your libraries in Python again guys if
you don't know python uh check the
description box I'll leave a link there
right you can go through that video as
well next what we're doing is we're
reading the fruit data in the form of a
table right we've stored it in a
variable called fruits now if you want
to see the first few rows of the data
let's print the first few observations
in our data set
right so this is our data set right
these are the fruit labels so we have
around four fruits in our data set we
have apple we have mandarin orange and
lemon okay now fruit label denotes
nothing but the label of Apple which is
one Mandarin has two similarly orange is
labeled as three and lemon is labeled as
four then fruit subtype is basically the
family of fruit that belongs to mass is
the mass of the fruit width height and
color score these are all our predictor
variables we have to identify the type
of fruit depending on these predictor
variables all right so first we saw a
couple of observations over here next if
you want to see the shape of your uh
data set this is what it looks like
there are around 59 observations with
seven predictor variables which is 1 2 3
4 5 6 and seven we have seven variables
in total sorry not predictor variables
this seven denotes both your predictor
and your target variable right next I'm
just showing you the four fruits that we
have in our data set which is Apple
mandarin orange and lemon next I'm just
grouping uh fruits by their names okay
so we have 19 apples in our data set we
have 16 lemons we have only five
mandarins and we have 19 oranges all
right even though the number of Mandarin
samples is low we'll have to work with
it because right now I'm just trying to
make you understand the classification
algorithms right the main aim for me
behind uh doing these demos is so that
you understand how classification a
algorithms work now what you can do is
you can also plot a graph in order to
see the frequency of each of these
fruits okay I'll show you what the plot
looks like right the number of apples
and oranges is the same right we have I
think around 19 apples and oranges and
similarly this is the count for lemons
okay so this a small visualization guys
visualization is actually very important
when it comes to machine learning
because you can see most of the
relations and correlations by plotting
graphs right you can't see those
correlations by just you know running
code and all of that only when you plot
different variables on your graph you'll
understand how they are related one of
the main tasks in machine learning is to
visualize data right it ensures that you
understand the correlation between
data next what we're going to do is
we'll graph something known as a box
plot okay a box plot is basically helps
you understand the distribution of your
data right let me uh run the box plot
and I'll show you what exactly I
mean right so this is our box plot so
box plot will basically give you a
clearer idea of the distribution of your
input variables okay it is mainly used
in exploratory data analysis and it
represents the distribution of the data
and its variability now the box plot
contains upper quartile and lower
quartiles so the box plot basically
spans your inter quartile range or
something known as IQR IQR is nothing
but your third quartile subtracted from
your first quartile now again this
involves statistics and probability so
I'll be leaving a link in the
description box you can go through that
video I've explained statistics
probability IQR range and all of that in
that right so one of the main reasons
why box plots are used is to detect any
sort of outliers in the data right since
the box plot spans the IQR it detects
the data points that lie outside the
average range so if you see in the color
space most of the data is distributed
around the IQR right whereas here the
data is not that well distributed height
also is not very well distributed but
color space is pretty well distributed
right this is what the box plot shows
you so guys this involves a lot of math
right all of these each and every
function in machine learning involves a
lot of math so you know it's necessary
to have a good understanding of
Statistics probability and all of that
right now next what we'll do is we'll
plot a histogram histogram will
basically show you the frequency of
occurrence right let me just plot this
and then we'll try and
understand so here you can understand a
few correlations okay some pairs of
these attributes are correlated for
example mass and width right they're
somehow correlated along the same ranges
right so this suggests a high
correlation and a predictable
relationship like if you look at their
graphs they're quite similar right so
for each of the predictive variables
I've drawn a histogram right for each of
that input data we've drawn a histogram
now guys again like I said plotting
graphs is very important because you
understand a lot of correlations that
you cannot understand by just looking at
your data right or just running
operations on your data repeat or just
running code on your data okay now next
what we're doing here is we're just
dividing the data set into Target and
predictor variables right so basically
you've created an array of feature names
which has your predictor variables right
it has mass width height color space and
you have assigned that as X since this
is your input and Y is your output which
is your fruit label that is it'll show
whether it is an apple orange lemon and
so on now the next step that we've
performed over here is pretty evident
all right again this is data splicing so
data splicing by now I'm sure all of you
know what it is it is splitting your
data into training and testing data so
that's what we've done over here next we
are importing something known as the
minmax scaler scaling or normalizing
your data is very important in machine
learning now I'm saying this because
your raw data can be very biased right
so it's very important to normalize your
data now when I say normalize your data
so if you look at the value of mass and
if you look at the value of height and
color you see that mass is ranging in
100s and you know double digits whereas
height is in single digits and color
score is not even in single digits so if
some of your variables have a very high
range right you know they have a very
high scale like they're in two digits or
three digits whereas other variables are
single digits and lesser then your
output is going to be very biased right
it's obvious that it's going to be very
device that's why you have to scale your
data in such a way that all of these
values will have a similar range right
so that's exactly what the scaler
function does okay now since we have
already divided our data into training
and testing data our next step is to
build the model right so first we're
going to be using the logistic
regression algorithm right I already
discussed logistic regression with you
all it's a classification algorithm
which is basically used to predict the
outcome of a categorical variable right
so we already have the logistic
regression class in Python all you have
to do is you have to give an instance
for this function which is log reg over
here and I'm fitting this instance with
the training data set meaning that I'm
running the algorithm with the training
data set once you do that you can
calculate the accuracy by using this
function so here I'm calculating the
accuracy on the training data set and on
the testing data set set okay so let's
look at the output of this now guys
ignore this future warning right
warnings are ignored in Python now
accuracy of the logistic regression
classifier on the training data set is
around 70% which is pretty good on the
training data set but when it comes to
classifying on the test data set it's
only 40% right which is not that good
for a classifier now again this can
depend on the problem statement right
for which problem statement is logistic
regression more suitable right next
we'll do the same thing using the
decision tree so again we'll just call
the decision tree function and we'll fit
it with a training data set we'll
calculate the accuracy of the decision
Tree on the training and the testing
data set so if you do that for a
decision Tree on the training data set
you get a 100% accuracy right but on the
testing data set you have around 87% of
accuracy now this is something that I
discussed with you all earlier that
decision trees are very good with
training data set because of a process
known as overfitting right but when it
comes to classifying the outcome on the
testing data set the accuracy reduces
now this is very good compared to
logistic regression right for this
problem statement decision trees works
better than logistic regression coming
to KNN classifier again all you have to
do is you have to call the K neighbor
classifier
right this function and you have to fit
this with the training data set if you
calculate the accuracy for a Cann
classifier we get a good accuracy
actually on the training data set we get
an accuracy of 95% and on the testing
data set is 100% that is really good
because our testing data set actually
achieved more of an accuracy than on our
training data set right now all of this
depends on the value of K that you've
chosen for K&N now uh I mentioned that
you use the elbow method to choose the
key value in the K nearest neighbor I'll
be discussing the elbow method in the
next section right so don't worry if you
haven't understood that yet now we're
also using a knife bi classifier here
we're using a goian knif b classifier
goian is basically a type of knif B
classifier right I'm not going to go
into depth of this because it'll just
extend our session to much more longer
okay and if you want to know more about
this I'll leave a link in the
description box you can read all about
the caution knif B classifier how the
math behind this is the same right it's
uses knif bias it uses the bias theorem
itself now again we're going to call
this class and then we're going to run
our data training data on it right so
using the knif bi classifier we're
getting an accuracy of
0.86 on the training data set and on the
testing data set we're getting a 67%
accuracy
okay now let's do the same thing with
support Vector machines importing the
support Vector classifier right and
we're fitting the training data into the
algorithm we're getting a accuracy of
around 61% on the training data set and
33% on the testing data set now guys
this accuracy and all depends also on
the problem statement right it depends
on the type of data that support Vector
machines get usually svm is very good on
large data sets now since we have a very
small data set over here it's sort of
obvious why the accuracy is so less so
Guys these were a couple of
classification algorithms that I showed
you here now because our KNN classifier
classified our data set more accurately
we'll look at the predictions that the
KNN classifier made okay now we're
storing all our predicted values in the
predict variable now in order to show
you the accuracy of the Cann model we're
going to use something known as the
confusion Matrix so a confusion Matrix
is a table that is often used to
describe the performance of a
classification model so confusion Matrix
actually represents a tabular
representation of actual versus
predicted values so when you draw a
confusion Matrix on the actual versus
predicted values for the Cann classifier
this is what the confusion Matrix looks
like now we have four rows over here if
you see we have four rows the first row
represents apples second Mandarin third
represents uh lemons and fourth oranges
right so this four value corresponds to
0 comma 0 meaning that it was correctly
able to classify all the four apples
okay this one value represents one comma
1 meaning that a classifier correctly
classified this as mandrin this made
Matrix is drawn on actual values versus
predicted values now if you look at the
summary of the confusion Matrix you'll
get something known as Precision recall
F1 score and support Precision is
basically the ratio of the correctly
predicted positive observations to the
total predicted positive observations so
the correctly predicted positive
observations are four and there are
total of four apples in the testing data
set so that's why get a Precision of one
okay so recall on the other hand is a
ratio of correctly predicted positive
observations to all the observations in
the class again we've correctly
classified four apples and there are
total of four apples F1 score is nothing
but the weighted average of your
presision and your recall okay and your
support basically denotes the number of
data points that were correctly
classified so in our KNN algorithm since
we got 100% accuracy all our data points
were correctly classified so 15 out of
15 were correctly classified because we
have a 100% accuracy so that's how you
read a confusion Matrix okay you have
four important measures Precision recall
F1 score and support right F1 score is
just the ratio or the weighted average
of your precision and your recall so
Precision is basically the correctly
predicted positive observations to the
total predicted positive observations
theall is the ratio of the pred
predicted positive observations to all
your observations right so guys that was
it for the demo of classification
algorithms we discuss regression
algorithms and we discuss classification
algorithms now it's time to talk about
unsupervised learning algorithms under
unsupervised learning algorithms we try
to solve clustering problems and the
most important clustering algorithm that
is known as K means clustering so we're
going to discuss the K means algorithm
I'll also show you a demo where we'll be
executing the clustering algorithm and
you know seeing how it is implemented to
solve a problem now the main aim of the
kin's algorithm is to group similar
elements or data points into a cluster
so it is basically the process by which
objects are classified into a predefined
number of groups so that they are much
dissimilar as possible from one group to
another group but as much similar as
possible within each group now what I
mean is let's say you're trying to
cluster this population into four
different groups such that each group
has people within a specified range of
age let's say group one is of people
between the age 18 and 22 similarly
group two is between 23 and 35 group
three is 36 and 39 or something like
that so let's say you're trying to
Cluster people into different groups
based on their age so for such problems
you can make use of the keans clustering
algorithm one of the major applications
of the clustering algorithm is seen in
targeted marketing I don't know how many
of you are aware of targeted marketing
targeted marketing is all about
marketing a specific product to a
specific audience let's say you're
trying to sell fancy clothes or a fancy
set of bags and all of that now the
perfect audience for such product would
be teenagers it would be people around
the age of 16 to 21 or 18 so that is
what targeted marketing is all about
your product is marketed to a specific
audience that might be interested in it
that is what targeted marketing is so K
means clustering is used majorly in
targeted marketing a lot of e-commerce
websites like Amazon flip card eBay all
of these make use of clustering
algorithms in order to Target the Right
audience now let's see how the K means
clustering works now the K in K means
denotes the number of clusters let's say
I give you a data set containing 20
points and you want to Cluster this data
set into four clusters that means your K
will be equal to four so K basically
stands for the number of clusters in
your data set or the number of clusters
you want to form you start by defining
the number K now for each of these
clusters you're going to choose a
centroid so for every cluster there are
four clusters in our data set for each
of these clusters you'll randomly select
one of the data points as a centroid now
what you'll do is you'll start Computing
the distance from that centroid to every
other point in that cluster as you keep
Computing the centroid and the distance
between the centroid and other data
points in that cluster your centroid
keeps shifting because you're trying to
get to the average of that cluster
whenever you're trying to get to the
average of the cluster the centroid
keeps shifting because the centroid
keeps converging and it keeps shifting
let's try to understand how key means
Works let's say that this a data set
like this is given to us let's say be
given random points like these and you
are asked to use key means algorithm on
this so your first step will be to
decide the number of clusters you want
to create so let's say I want to create
three different clusters so my K value
will be equal to three The Next Step
will be to provide centroids of all the
Clusters what you'll do is initially
you'll randomly pick three data points
as your centroids for your three
different clusters so basically this red
denotes the centroid for one cluster
blue denotes a centroid for another
cluster and this Green Dot denotes the
centroid for another cluster now what
happens is in K means the algorithm will
calculate the ukian distance of the
points from each centroid and assign the
points to the closest cluster now since
we had three centroids here now what
you're going to do is you're going to
calculate the distance from each and
every data point to all the centroids
and you're going to check which data
point is closest to which centroid so
let's say data point a is closest to the
blue centroid so you're going to assign
the data point a to the blue cluster So
based on the distance between the
centroid and the cluster you're going to
form three different clusters now again
you're going to calculate the centroid
and you're going to form a new cluster
which is formed better clusters because
you're recomputing all the centroids
basically your centroids represent the
mean of each of your cluster so you need
to make sure that your mean is actually
the centroid of each cluster
so you'll keep recomputing these
centroids until the position of your
centroid does not change that means that
your centroid is actually the mean or
the average of that particular cluster
so that's how K means works it's very
simple all you have to do is you have to
start by defining the K value after that
you'll have to randomly pick the number
of K centroids then you're going to
calculate the average distance of each
of the data points from the centroids
and you're going to assign a data point
to the centroid it is closing to that's
how K means works it's a very simple
process all you have to do is you have
to keep iterating and you have to
recompute the centroid value until the
centroid value does not change until you
get a constant centroid value now guys
again in K means you make use of
distance measures like ukan I already
discussed what ukan is all about so to
summarize how K means works you start by
picking the number of clusters then you
pick a centroid after that you calculate
the distance of the objects to the
centroid then you group the data points
into specific clusters based on that
distance you have to keep Computing the
centroid until each data point is
assigned to the closest cluster so
that's how key means works now let's
look at the elbow method the elbow
method is basically used in order to
find out the most Optimum K value for a
particular problem so the elbow method
is quite simple actually you start off
by Computing the sum of squared errors
for sum values of K now sum of squared
error is basically the sum of the
squared distance between each member of
the cluster and its centroid so you
basically calculate the sum of squared
errors for different values of K for
example you can consider K value as 2 4
6 8 10 12 consider all these values
compute the sum of squared errors for
each of these values now if you plot
your K value against your sum of squared
errors you will see that the error
decreases as K gets larger this is
because the number of clusters increase
if the number of clusters increase it
means that the Distortion gets smaller
the Distortion keeps decreasing as the
number of clusters increase that's
because the more clusters you have the
closer each centroid will be with its
data points so as you keep increasing
the number of clusters your Distortion
will also decrease so the idea of the
elbow method is to choose the K at which
the Distortion decreases abruptly so if
you look at this graph at K = to 4 the
Distortion is abruptly decreasing so
this is how you find the value of K when
your Distortion drops abruptly that's
the most optimal ke value you should be
choosing for your problem statement so
let me repeat the idea behind the elbow
method you're just going to graph the
number of clusters you have versus the
squared sum of errors this graph will
basically give you the Distortion now
the Distortion is obviously going to
decrease if you increase the number of
clusters and there is going to be one
point in this graph wherein the
Distortion decreases very abruptly now
for that point you need to find out the
value of K and that will be your most
optimal K value that's how you choose
your K means K value and your KN andn K
value as well so guys this is how the
elbow method is it's very simple and it
can be easily implemented now we're
going to look at a small demo which
involves key means this is actually a
very interesting demo now guys one
interesting application of clustering is
in color compression with images for
example imagine you have an image with
millions of colors in it in most images
a large number of colors will be unused
and many of the pixels in the image will
have similar or even identical colors
now having too many colors in your image
makes it very hard for image processing
and image analysis so this is one area
where K's is applied very often it's
applied in image segmentation image
analysis image compression and so on so
what we're going to do in this demo is
we're going to use an image from the
psych learn data set okay it is a
pre-built image and you will require to
install the pillow package for this
we're going to use an image from the
cycle learn data set module so we'll
Begin by importing the libraries as
usual and we'll be loading our image as
China the image is china. jpeg and we'll
be loading this in a variable called
China so if you want to look at the
shape of our image you can run this
command so we're going to get a
threedimensional value so we're getting
427a 640 comma 3 now this is basically a
three-dimensional array of size height
width and RGB it contains red blue green
contributions as integers from 0 to 255
so your pixel values range between 0 and
255 and I think zero stands for your
black and 255 represents white if I'm
not wrong and basically that's what this
area shape denotes now one way we can
view this set of pixels is as a cloud of
points in a three-dimensional color
space so what we'll do is we will
reshape the data and rescale the color
so that they lie between zero and one so
the output of this will be a
two-dimensional Arena so basically we
can visualize these pixels in this color
space now what we're going to do is
we're going to try and plot our pixels
we have a really huge data set which
contains around 16 million possible
colors so this denotes a very very large
data set so let me show you what it
looks like we have red against green and
red against Blue these are our RGB
values and we can have around 16 million
possible combination of colors the data
set is way too large for us to compute
so what we'll do is we will reduce the
16 million colors to just 16 colors we
can do that by using K means clustering
because we can cluster similar colors
into similar groups so this is exactly
where we'll be importing K means now one
thing to note here is because we're
dealing with a very large data set we
will use the mini batch K means this
operates on subsets of the data to
compute the results more quickly and
more accurately just like the K means
algorithm because I told you this data
set is really huge even though this is a
single image the number of of pixel
combinations can come up to 16 million
which is a lot now each pixel is
considered as a data point when you take
an image into consideration when you
have data points and data values that's
different when you're studying an image
for image classification or image
segmentation each and every pixel is
considered so basically you're building
matrices of all of these pixel values so
having 16 million pixels is a very huge
data set so for that reason we'll be
using the mini badge K means it's very
similar to K means only difference is
that it'll operate on subsets of the
data because the data set is too huge
it'll operate on subsets so basically
we're making use of K means in order to
Cluster these 16 million color
combinations into just 16 colors so
basically we're going to form 16
clusters in this data set now the result
is a recoloring of the original pixel
where every pixel is assigned the color
of its closest cluster Center let's say
that there are a couple of colors which
are very close to Green so we're going
to Cluster all of these similar colors
into one cluster we'll keep doing this
until we get 16 clusters so obviously to
do this we'll be using the clustering
method camans let me show you what the
output looks like so basically this was
the original image from the psychic data
set and this is the 16 color segmented
image basically we have only 16 colors
here here we can have around 16 million
color colors here there are only 16
colors if you count also you can only
see particular colors now obviously
there's a lot of distortion over here
but this is how you study an image
remove all the extra contrast that is
there in an image you try to reduce the
pixels to a smaller set of data as
possible the more varied pixels you have
the harder it is going to be for you to
study the image for analysis now
obviously there are some details which
are lost in this but overall the image
is still recognizable so here basically
Al we've compressed this with a
compression factor of around 1 million
because each cluster will have around 1
million data points in it or pixel
values in it or pixels in it now this is
an interesting application of ke means
there are actually better ways you can
compress information and image so
basically I showed you this example
because I want you to understand the
power of K means algorithm you can
cluster a data set that is this huge
into just 16 colors initially there were
16 million and now you can cluster it to
16 colors so guys kin plays a very huge
role in computer vision image processing
object detection and so on it's a very
important algorithm when it comes to
detecting objects so in self-driving
cars and all you can make use of such
algorithms so guys that was all about
unsupervised learning and supervised
learning now it's the last type of
machine learning which is reinforcement
learning now this is actually a very
interesting part of machine learning and
it is quite different from supervised
and unsupervised so we'll be discussing
all the concepts that are involved in
reinforcement learning and also
reinforcement learning is a little more
advanced when I say advance I mean that
it's been used in applications such as
self-driving cars and is also a part of
a lot of deep learning applications such
as alphao and so on so reinforcement
learning has a different concept to it
itself so we'll be discussing all the
concepts under it so just to brush up
your information about reinforcement
learning reinforcement learning is a
part of machine learning where an agent
is put in an unknown environment and he
learns how to behave in this environment
by performing certain actions and
observing the rewards which it gets from
these actions reinforcement learning is
all about taking an appropriate action
in order to maximize the reward in a
particular situation now let's
understand reinforcement learning with
an analogy let's consider a scenario
wherein a baby is learning how to work
this scenario can go about in two
different ways the first is baby starts
walking and it makes it to the candy and
since the candy is the end goal the baby
is very happy and it's positive meaning
the baby is happy and it received a
positive reward now the second way this
can go on is that the baby starts
walking but it falls due to some hurdle
in between that's really cute so the
baby gets hurt and it doesn't get to the
candy it's negative because the baby is
sad and it receives a negative negative
reward so just like how we humans learn
from our mistakes by trial and error
reinforcement learning is also similar
here we have an agent and in this case
the agent is the baby and the reward is
the candy with many hurdles in between
the agent is supposed to find the best
possible path to reach the reward that
is the main goal of reinforcement
learning now the reinforcement learning
process has two important components it
has something known as an agent and
something known as an environment now
the environment is the setting that the
agent is acting on and the agent
represents the reinforcement learning
algorithm the whole reinforcement
learning algorithm is basically the
agent the environment is the setting in
which you place the agent and it is a
setting wherein the agent takes various
actions the reinforcement learning
process starts when the environment
sends a state to the agent now the agent
based on the observations it makes he
takes an action in responds to that
state now in turn the environment will
send the next state and the respective
reward back to the agent now the agent
will update its knowledge with the
reward returned by the environment to
evaluate its last actions the loop
continues until the environment sends a
terminal state which means that the
agent has accomplished all of his tasks
to understand this better let's suppose
that our agent is playing Counter Strike
so the reinforcement learning process
can be broken down into a couple of
steps the first step is the
reinforcement learning agent which is
basically the player he collects a state
s not from the environment so whenever
you're playing counter- strike you start
off with Stage zero or stage one you
start off from the first level now based
on this state s notot the reinforcement
learning agent will take an action a not
so guys action can be anything that
causes a result now if the agent moves
left or right in the game that is also
considered as an action so initially the
action will be random because uh the
agent has no clue about the environment
let's suppose that you're playing
Counter Strike for the first time you
have no idea about how to play it so
you'll just start randomly you'll just
go with whatever whichever action you
think is right now the environment is
now in a state one after passing state
zero the environment will go into State
one once the environment updates the
state to state one the reinforcement
learning agent will get a reward R1 from
the environment this reward can be
anything like additional points or
you'll get additional weapons when
you're playing a Counter Strike now this
reinforcement learning Loop will go on
until the agent is dead or reaches the
destination and it continuously outputs
a sequence of State action and rewards
this is exactly how reinforcement
learning works it starts with the agent
being put in an environment and the
agent will randomly take some action in
that state zero after taking an action
depending on his action he'll either get
a reward and move on to state number one
or he will either die and go back to the
same state so this will keep happening
until the agent reaches the last stage
or he you know dies or reaches his
destination that's exactly how
reinforcement learning works now
reinforcement learning is the logic
behind a lot of games these days it's
been implemented in various games such
as DOTA a lot of you who play DotA might
know this now let's talk about a couple
of reinforcement learning definitions or
terminologies so first we have something
known as is the agent like I mentioned
an agent is the reinforcement learning
algorithm that learns from trial and
error an agent is the one that takes
actions like for example a soldier in
counter- strike navigating through the
game going right left and all of that is
the agent taking some action the
environment is basically the world
through which the agent moves now the
environment basically takes the agent's
current state and action as input and
Returns the agent reward and its next
State as the output next we have
something known as action all the
possible steps that an agent can take is
considered as an action next we have
something known as state now the current
condition returned by the environment is
known as the state reward is an instant
return from the environment to appraise
The Last Action of the reinforcement
learning agent all of these terms are
pretty understandable next we have
something known as policy now policy is
the approach that the agent uses to
determine the next next action based on
the current state policy is basically
the approach with which you go around in
the environment next we have something
known as value now the expected
long-term return with discount as
opposed to the short-term reward R is
known as value now terms like discount
and value I'll be discussing in the
upcoming slides now action value is also
very similar to the value except it
takes an extra parameter known as the
current action don't worry about action
and Q value we'll talk about all of this
in the upcoming slides so make yourself
familiar with these terms because you'll
be seeing a whole lot of them in this
session so before we move any further
let's discuss a couple of more
reinforcement learning Concepts now we
have something known as reward
maximization so if you haven't realized
it already the basic aim of
reinforcement learning agent is to
maximize the reward how does this happen
let's try to understand this in a little
more detail so basically the agent works
based on the theory of reward
maximization now this is exactly why the
agent must be trained in such a way that
he takes the best action so that the
reward is maximum now let me explain a
reward maximization with a small example
now in this figure you can see there is
a fox there is some meat and there is a
tiger our reinforcement learning agent
is the fox now his end goal is to eat
the maximum amount of meat before being
eaten by the tiger now because the fox
is a very clever guy guy he eats the
meat that is closer to him rather than
the meat which is close to the tiger
because the closer he gets to the tiger
the higher are his chances of getting
killed that's pretty obvious even if the
reward near the tiger are bigger meat
junks that'll be discounted this is
exactly what discount is we just
discussed it in the previous slide this
is done because of the uncertainty
factor that the tiger might actually
kill the fox now the next thing to
understand is how discounting of reward
works now in order to understand
discounting we Define a discount rate
called gamma the value of gamma is
between zero and one and the smaller the
gamma the larger the discount and so on
now don't worry about these Concepts
gamma and all of that we'll be seeing
that in our practical demo today so
let's move on and discuss another
concept known as exploration and
exploitation trade-off now guys before
that I hope all of you understood reward
maximization basically the main aim
behind reinforcement learning is to
maximize the rewards that an agent can
get now one of the most important
Concepts in reinforcement learning is
the exploration and exploitation
trade-off now exploration like the name
suggests it's about exploring and
capturing more information about an
environment on the other hand
exploitation is about using the already
known exploited information to heighten
your reward now consider the same
example that we saw previously so here
the fox eats only the meat chunks which
are close to him he doesn't eat the
bigger meat chunks which are at the top
even though the bigger meat chunks would
get him more reward so if the fox only
focuses on the closest reward he will
never reach the big chunks of meat this
process is known as exploitation but if
the fox decides to explore a bit it can
find the bigger reward which is the big
chunk of meat this is known as
exploration so this is the difference
between exploitation and duration it's
always best if the agent explores the
environment tries to figure out a way in
which he can get the maximum number of
rewards now let's discuss another
important Concept in reinforcement
learning which is known as the markout
decision process basically the
mathematical approach for mapping a
solution in reinforcement learning is
called markout decision process it's the
mathematics behind reinforcement
learning now in a way the purpose of
reinforcement learning is to solve a
mark out decision process now in order
to get a solution there are a set of
parameters in a markout decision process
there's a set of actions a there's a set
of States s reward R policy pi and value
V also this image represents how a
reinforcement learning process works
there's an agent the agent takes some
action on the environment the
environment in turn will reward the
agent and it will give him the next date
that's how reinforcement learning
process works so to sum everything up
what happens in Mark out decision
process and reinforcement learning is
the agent has to take an action a to
transition from the start state to the
end State s while doing so the agent
will receive some reward R for each
action he takes now the series of
actions that are taken by the agent
Define the policy and the rewards
collected Define the value the main goal
here is to maximize the rewards by
choosing the optimum policy so you're
going to choose the best possible
approach in order to maximize the
rewards that's the main aim of Mark out
decision process to understand Mark out
decision process let's look at a small
example I'm sure all of you already know
about the shortest path problem right we
all had such problems and Concepts in
math to find the shortest path now
consider this representation over here
right this figure here our goal is to
find the shortest path between two nodes
let's say we're trying to find the
shortest path between node a and node D
now each Edge if you can see has a
number linked with it this number
denotes the cost to Travers through that
edge so we need to choose a policy to
travel from a to d in such a way that
our cost is minimum so in this problem
the set of states are denoted by the
nodes a b c d the action is to Traverse
from one node to the other for example
if you're going from a to c that is an
action C to B is an action action b2d is
another action now the reward is the
cost represented by each Edge policy is
a part taken to reach the destination so
we need to make sure that we choose a
policy in such a way that our cost is
minimized so what you can do is you can
start off at node a and you can take BB
steps to reach your destination
initially only the next possible node is
visible to you so from a you can either
go to b or you can go to C so if you
follow the greedy approach and take the
most Optimum step which is choosing a to
c instead of choosing a to B to C now
you're at node C and you want to
Traverse to node D again you must choose
your path very wisely so if you Travers
from a to C and C to B and B to D your
cost is the least but if you Traverse
from a to c to D your cost will actually
increase now you need to choose a policy
that will minimize your cost over here
so let's say for example the agent chose
a to c to D right it came to node C and
then it directly chose D now the policy
followed by our agent in this problem is
exploitation type because we didn't
explore the other nodes we just selected
three nodes and we traversed through
them and the policy we followed is not
actually an optimal policy we must
always Explore More to find out the
optimal policy even if the other nodes
are not giving us any more reward or is
actually increasing our cost we still
have to explore and find out if those
paths are actually better or that policy
is actually better the method that we
implemented Here is known as the policy
based learning now the aim here is to
find the best policy among all the
possible policies so guys apart from
policy based we also have value based
approach and action based approach value
based emphasizes on maximizing the
rewards and in action base we emphasize
on each action taken by the agent now a
point to note is that all of these
learning approaches have a simp end goal
the end goal is to effectively guide the
agent through the environment and
acquire the most number of rewards so
this was very simple to understand
markov's decision process exploitation
and exploration tradeoff and we also
discussed the different reinforcement
learning definitions right I hope all of
this was understandable now let's move
on and understand algorithm known as Q
learning algorithm so guys Q learning is
one of the most important algorithm Ms
in reinforcement learning and we'll
discuss this algorithm with the help of
a small example right we'll study this
example and then we'll implement the
same example using Python and we'll see
how it works so this is how our
demonstration looks for now now the
problem statement is to place an agent
in any one of the rooms numbered 0 1 2 3
and 4 and the goal is for the agent to
reach outside the building which is room
number five so basically this 0 1 2 3 4
represents the building
and five represents a room which is
outside the building now all these rooms
are connected by doors now these gaps
that you see between the rooms are
basically doors and each room is
numbered from 0er to four the outside of
the building can be thought of as a big
room which is room number five now if
you notice this diagram the door number
one and door number four lead directly
to room number five from one you can
directly go to five and from four also
you can directly go to five but if you
want to go to five from room number two
then you'll first have to go to room
number three room number one and then
room number five so these are indirect
links direct links are from room number
one and room number four so I hope all
of you are clear with the problem
statement you're basically going to have
a reinforcement learning agent and that
agent has to Traverse through all the
rooms in such a way that he reaches room
number five to solve this problem first
what we'll do is we'll represent the
rooms on a graph now each room is
denoted as as a node and the links that
are connecting these nodes are the doors
all right so we have Node 1 to five and
the links between each of these nodes
represent the Dos so for example if you
look at this graph over here you can see
that there is a direct connection from 1
to 5 meaning that you can directly go
from room number one to your goal which
is room number five so if you want to go
from room number 3 to 5 you can either
go to room number one and then go to
five or you can go from room number
three to four and then to five so guys
remember end goal is to reach room
number five now to set the room number
five as the goal State what we'll do is
we'll associate a reward value to each
door the doors that lead immediately to
the goal will have an instant reward of
100 so basically 1 to five will have a
reward of 100 and four to five will also
have a reward of 100 now other doors
that are not directly connected to the
Target room will have a zero reward
because they do not directly lead us to
the goal so let's say you place the
agent in room number three so to go from
room number three to one the agent will
get a reward of zero and to go from 1 to
five the agent will get a reward of 100
now because the doors are two-way the
two arrows are assigned to each room you
can see an arrow going towards the room
and one coming from the room so each
Arrow contains an instant reward as
shown in this figure now of course room
number five will loop back to itself
with a reward of 100 and all other
direct connections to the Gold Room will
carry a reward of 100 now in Q learning
the goal is to reach the state with the
highest reward so that if the agent
arrives at the goal it will remain there
forever so I hope all of you are clear
with this diagram now the terminologies
in Q learning include two terms State
and action okay your room basically
represents the state so if you're in
state two it basically means that you're
in room number two now the action is
basic basically the movement of the
agent from one room to the other room
let's say you're going from room number
two to room number three right that is
basically an action now let's consider a
small example let's say you place the
agent in room number two and he has to
get to the goal so your initial state
will be state number two or room number
two then from room number two you'll go
to room number three which is state
three then from state three you can
either go back to state two or go to
state 1 or state 4 if you go to state 4
from there you can directly go to your
go room which is five this is how the
agent is going to Traverse now in order
to depict the rewards that you're going
to get we're going to create a matrix
known as the reward Matrix okay this is
represented by r or also known as the r
Matrix now the minus one in this table
represents null values that is basically
where there isn't a link between the
nodes that is represented as minus one
now there is no link between 0 and 0
that's why it's minus one now if you
look at this diagram there is no direct
link from 0 to one right that's why I've
put minus one over here as well but if
you look at 0 comma 4 we have a value of
zero over here which means that you can
Traverse from 0 to 4 but your reward is
going to be zero because four is not
your goal State however if you look at
the Matrix look at 1 comma 5 in 1 comma
5 we have a reward value of 100 this is
because you can directly go from room
number one to five and five is the end
goal that's why we have assigned a
reward of 100 similarly for 4 comma 5 we
have a reward of 100 and for 5 comma 5
we have a reward of 100 zeros basically
represent other links but they are zero
because they do not lead to the end goal
so I hope you all understood the reward
matrix it's very simple now before we
move any further we'll be creating
another Matrix known as the Q Matrix now
the Q Matrix basically represents the
memory of what the a agent has learned
through experience the rows of the Q
Matrix will represent the current state
of the agent The Columns will represent
the next possible actions leading to the
next state and the formula to calculate
the Q Matrix is this formula right here
we have q State comma action R State
comma action which is nothing but the
reward Matrix then we have a parameter
known as the gamma parameter which I'll
explain shortly and then we are
multiplying this with the maximum of Q
next state comma all actions
now don't worry if you haven't
understood this formula I'll explain
this with a small example for now let's
understand what the gamma parameter is
so basically the value of gamma will be
between 0 and 1 if gamma is closer to
zero it means that the agent will tend
to consider only immediate rewards now
if the gamma is closer to one It means
that the agent will consider future
rewards with greater weight now what
exactly I'm trying to say is if gamma is
closer to one then we'll be performing
some something known as exploitation I
hope you all remember what exploitation
and exploration trade-off is so if your
gamma is closer to zero it means that
the agent is not going to explore the
environment instead it'll just choose a
couple of states and it'll just Traverse
through those States but if your gamma
parameter is closer to one It means that
the agent will Traverse through all
possible States meaning that it will
perform exploration not exploitation so
the closer your gamma parameter is to
one the more your agent will explore
this is exactly what gamma parameter is
if you want to get the best policy it's
always practical that you choose a gamma
parameter which is closer to one we want
the agent to explore the environment as
much as possible so that it can get the
best policy and the maximum rewards I
hope this is clear now let me just tell
you what the Q learning algorithm is
step by step so you begin the Q learning
algorithm by setting the gamma parameter
and the environment rewards in Matrix R
okay so first you'll have to set these
two values we've already calculated the
reward Matrix we need to set the gamma
parameter next you'll initialize the
Matrix Q to zero now why do you do this
now if you remember I said that Q Matrix
is basically the memory of the agent
initially obviously the agent has no
memory of the environment it's new to
the environment and you're placing it
randomly anywhere so it has zero memory
that's why you initialize ize The Matrix
Q to zero after that you'll select a
random initial State and you'll place
your agent in that initial State then
you'll set this initial State as your
current state now from the current state
you'll select some action that will lead
you to the next state then you'll
basically get the maximum Q value for
this next state based on all the
possible actions that you take then
you'll keep Computing this Q value until
you reach the goal State now that might
be a little bit confusing so let's look
at the this entire thing with a small
example let's say that first you're
going to begin with setting your gamma
parameter so I've set my gamma parameter
to 0.8 which is pretty close to one this
means that our agent will explore the
environment as much as possible and also
I'm setting the initial State as room
one meaning I'm in state one or I'm in
room one so basically your agent is
going to be in room number one the next
step is to initialize the Q Matrix as
zero Matrix so this is our Q Matrix you
you can see that everything is set to
zero because the agent has no memory at
all he hasn't traversed to any node so
he has no memory now since the agent is
in room one he can either go to room
number three or he can go to room number
five let's randomly select room number
five so from room number five you're
going to calculate the maximum Q value
for the next state based on all possible
actions so all the possible actions from
room number five is 1 4 and 5
so basically we're traversing from Q 1
comma 5 that's why I put 1A 5 over here
State comma action your reward Matrix
will have r1a 5 now R1 comma 5 is
basically 100 that's why I put 100 over
here now your gamma parameter is 0.8 so
guys what I'm doing here is I'm just
substituting the values in this formula
so let me just repeat this whole thing Q
State comma action so you in state
number one correct and your action is
you're going to R number five so your Q
State comma action is 1A 5 again your
reward Matrix R 1A 5 is 100 so here
you're going to put 100 plus your gamma
parameter your gamma parameter is
0.8 then you're going to calculate the
maximum Q value for the next state based
on all possible actions so let's look at
the next state from room number five you
can go to either 1 you can go to four or
you can go to five so your actions are 5
comma 1 5 5A 4 and 5A 5 that's exactly
what I mentioned over here q5a 1 Q 5A 4
and q5a five you're basically putting
all the next possible actions from state
number five from here you'll calculate
the maximum Q value that you're getting
for each of these now your Q value is
zero because initially your Q Matrix is
set to zero so you're going to get Zer
for Q 5A 1 5aa 4 and 5A 5 so that's why
you'll get 0.8 into 0
and hence your q1a 5 becomes 100 this
100 comes from R 1A 5 right I hope all
of you understood this so next what
you'll do is you'll update this 1 comma
5 value in your Q Matrix because you
just calculated Q 1A 5 so I've updated
it over here now for the next episode
we'll start with a randomly chosen
initial state right again let's say that
we randomly chose state number three now
from room number three you can either go
to room number one 2 or 4 let's randomly
select room number one now from room
number five you calculate the maximum Q
value for the next possible actions so
let's calculate the Q formula for this
so your Q State comma action becomes 3
comma 1 because you're in state number
three and your action is you're going to
room number one so your R3 comma 1 let's
see what R3 comma 1 is R3 comma 1 is
zero so you're going to put zero over
here plus your gamma parameter which is
0.8 and then you're going to check the
next possible actions from room number
one and you're going to choose the
maximum value from these two so q1a 3
and q1a 5 denote your next possible
actions from room number one so q1a 3 is
0er but q1a 5 is 100 so we just
calculated this 100 in the previous step
so out of 0 and 100 100 is your maximum
value so you're going to choose 100 now
0. 8 into 100 is nothing but 80 so again
your Q Matrix gets updated right you see
an 80 over here so basically what you're
doing is as you're taking actions you're
updating your Q value you're just
calculating the Q value at every step
you're putting it in your Q Matrix so
that your agent remembers that okay when
I went from room number one to room
number five I had a q value of 100
similarly 3: 1 gave me a q value of 80
so basically this Q Matrix represents
the memory of your agent I hope all of
you are clear with this so basically
what we're going to do is we're going to
keep iterating through this Loop until
we've gone through all possible States
and reach the goal state which is five
also our main aim here is to find the
most Optimum policy to get to room
number five now let's implement the
exact same thing using python so that
was a lot of theory now let's understand
how this is done practically all right
so we begin by importing your Library
all right we're going to be using the
numpy library over here after that we'll
input the r Matrix we've already created
the r Matrix this is the exact reward
Matrix that I showed you a couple of
minutes ago right so I've created a
matrix called R and I've basically
stored all the rewards in it right if
you want to see the r Matrix let me
print
it so basically this is your R Matrix
right right if you remember Node 1 to 5
you have a reward of 100 node 4 to 5 you
have a reward of 100 and 5 to 5 you have
a reward of 100 because all of these
nodes directly lead us to the reward
correct next what we're doing is we're
creating a q Matrix which is basically a
6 into six Matrix which represents all
the states 0 to 5 and this Matrix is
basically zero after that we're setting
the gamma parameter now guys you can
play around with this code and you know
you can change the gamma parameter to
0.7 or 0.9 and see how much more the
agent will explore or whether it will
perform exploitation here I've set the
gamma parameter 0.8 which is a pretty
good number now what I'm doing is I'm
setting the initial State as one all
right you can randomly choose this state
according to your needs I've set the
initial State as one now this function
will basically give me all the available
actions from my initial State okay since
I've set my initial State as one it will
give me all the possible actions here
what I'm doing is since my initial state
is one I'm checking in my row number one
which value is equal to Zer or greater
than zero those denote my available
actions right so look at our row number
one here we have 1 Zer and we have a 100
over here this is 1A 4 and this is 1A 5
so if you look at the row number one
since I've selected the initial State as
one we'll consider row number one
okay what I'm doing is in row number one
I have two numbers which are either
equal to zero or greater than zero these
denote my possible actions 1A 3 has a
value of 0er and 1A 5 has a value of 100
which means that the agent can either go
to room number three or it can go to
room number five what I'm trying to say
is from room number one you can
basically go to room number three or
room number five this is exactly what
I've coded over here
right if you remember the reward Matrix
from one you can Traverse to only room
number three directly and room number
five directly okay that's exactly what
I've mentioned in my code over here so
this will basically give me the
available actions from my current
state now once I've moved to my next
state I need to check the available
actions from that state what I'm doing
over here is basically this right if you
remember from room number one we can go
to three and five correct and from three
and five I'll randomly select a state
and from that state I need to find out
all possible actions that's exactly what
I've done over here okay now this will
randomly choose an action for me from
all my available actions all right next
we need to update our Q Matrix depending
on the actions that we took if you
remember right so that's exactly what
this update function is for now guys
this
entire is for calculating the Q value I
hope all of you remember the formula
which is Q State comma action R State
comma action plus gamma into max value
max value will basically give me the
maximum value out of the all possible
actions I'm basically Computing this
formula now this will just update the Q
Matrix coming to the training phase what
we're going to do is we are going to set
a range here I've set a range of 10,000
meaning that my agent will perform
10,000 iterations you can set this
depending on your own needs and 10,000
iterations is a pretty huge number right
so basically my agent is going to go
through 10,000 possible iterations in
order to find the best policy right now
this is the exact same thing that we did
earlier we're setting the current state
and then we're choosing the available
action from the current state then from
there we'll choose a action at random
here we'll calculate the Q value and
we'll update the Q value in The Matrix
all right and here I'm doing nothing but
I'm printing the trained Q Matrix all
right this was the training phase now
the testing phase basically you're going
to randomly choose a current state all
right you're going to choose a current
state and you're going to keep looping
through this entire code until you reach
the goal state which is room number five
that's exactly what I'm doing in this
whole thing also in the end I'm printing
the selected path that is basically the
policy that the agent took to reach room
number five now if I set the current
state as one it should give me the best
policy to reach to room number five from
room number one all right let's run this
code and let's see if it's giving us
that now before that happens I want you
to check and tell me which is the best
possible way to get from room number one
to room number five it's obviously
directly like this right 1 to five is
the best policy to get from room number
one to room number five right so we
should get an output of 1 comma 5 right
right that's exactly what we're getting
this is our Q Matrix with all the Q
values and here we getting the selected
path so if your current state is one
your best policy is to go from 1 to five
now if you want to change your current
state let's say we set the current state
to two now before we run the code let's
see which is the best possible way to
get to room number five from room number
two from room number two you can go to
three then you can go to one and then
you can go to five
right this will give you a reward of 100
or you can go to room number three then
go to four and then go to five right
this will also give you a reward of 100
our path should be something like that
let's save it and let's run the
file so basically from state two you're
going to state three then to four and
then to five this is our best possible
path from two to room number five so
guys this is exactly how the Q learning
algorithm works and this was a simple
implementation of the entire example
that I just told you now if any of you
still have doubts regarding Q learning
or reinforcement learning make sure you
comment them in the comment section and
I'll try to answer all of your doubts
now we're done with machine learning
right we've completed the whole machine
learning model we've understood
reinforcement learning supervised
learning unsupervised learning and so on
before I get to deep learning I want to
clear a very common misconception right
A lot of people get confused between AI
machine learning and deep learning
because you know artificial intelligence
machine learning and deep learning have
very common applications for example
Siri is an application of artificial
intelligence machine learning and deep
learning so how are these three
connected are they the same thing or how
exactly is the relationship between
artificial intelligence machine learning
and deep learning this is what I'll be
discussing now artificial intelligence
is basically the science of getting
machines to mimic the behavior of human
beings all right but when it comes to
machine learning machine learning is a
subset of artificial intelligence that
focuses on getting machines to make
decisions by feeding them data all right
that's exactly what machine learning is
it is a subset of artificial
intelligence deep learning on the other
hand is a subset of machine learning
that uses the concept of neural networks
to solve complex problems so to Summit
up artificial intelligence machine
learning and deep learning are
interconnected Fields machine learning
and deep learning AIDS artificial
intelligence by providing a set of
algorithms and neural networks to solve
datadriven problems right that's how AI
machine learning and deep learning are
related I hope all of you have cleared
your misconceptions and doubts about AI
ML and deep learning now let's look at
our next topic which is limitations of
machine learning now the first
limitation is machine learning is not
capable enough to handle High
dimensional data this is where the input
and the output is very large so handling
and processing such type of data becomes
very complex and it takes up a lot of
resources this is also sometimes known
as the curse of dimensionality so to
understand this in simpler terms look at
the image shown on this slide consider a
line of 100 yards and let's say that you
dropped a coin somewhere on the line now
it's quite convenient for you to find
the coin by simply walking along the
line this is very simple because this
line is considered as single dimensional
entity now next you consider that you
have a square of 100 yards and let's say
You Dropped a coin somewhere in between
now it's quite evident that you're going
to take more time to find the coin
within that square as compared to the
previous scenario the square is let's
say a two-dimensional entity let's take
it a step ahead and let's consider a
cube okay let's say there's a cube cube
of side 100 yards and you have dropped a
coin somewhere in between this Cube now
it becomes even more difficult for you
to find the coin this time because this
is a three-dimensional entity so as your
dimension increases the problem becomes
more complex so if You observe that the
complexity is increasing with the
increase in your dimensions and in real
life the high dimensional data that
we're talking about has thousands of
Dimensions that makes it very complex to
handle and process now the high
dimensional data can easily be found in
use cases like image processing natural
language processing image translation
and so on now in K means itself we saw
that we had 16 million possible colors
right that is a lot of data so this is
why machine learning is restricted it
cannot be used in the process of image
recognition because image recognition
and images have a lot of pixels and they
have a lot of high dimensional data
right that's why machine learning
becomes very restrictive when it comes
to such use cases now the second major
challenge is to tell the computer what
are the features it should look for that
will play an important role in
predicting the outcome and in getting a
good accuracy now this process is
something known as feature extraction
now feeding raw data to the algorithm
rarely works and this is the reason why
feature extraction is a critical part of
machine learning workflow now the
challenge for the programmer here
increases because the effectiveness of
the algorithm depends on how insightful
the programmer is as a programmer you
have to tell the machine that these are
the features and depending on these
features you have to predict the outcome
right that's how machine learning works
so far in all our demos we saw that we
were providing predictor variables we
were providing input variables that will
help us predict the outcome right we
were trying to find correlations between
variables and we were trying to find out
the variable that is very important in
predicting the output variable so this
becomes a challenge for the programmer
that's why it's very difficult to apply
machine learning models to complex
problems like object recognition
handwriting recognition natural language
processing and so on now all these
problems and all these limitations in
machine learning led to the introduction
of deep learning now we're going to
discuss about deep learning now deep
learning is one of the only methods by
which we can overcome the challenges of
feature extraction this is Because deep
learning models are capable of learning
to focus on the right features by
themselves which requires very little
guidance from the programmer basically
deep learning mimics the way our brain
functions that is it learns from
experience so in deep learning what
happens is feature extraction happens
automatically you need very little
guidance by the programmer so deep
learning will learn the model and it'll
understand which feature or which
variable is important in predicting the
outcome let's say you have millions of
predictor variables for a particular
problem statement how are you going to
sit down and understand the significance
of each of these predictor variables
it's going to be almost impossible to
sit down with so many features that's
why we have deep learning whenever
there's High dimensionality data or
whenever the data is really large and it
has a lot of features and a lot of
predictor variables we use deep learning
deep learning will extract features on
its own and understand which features
are important in predicting your output
so that's the main idea behind deep
learning let me give you a small example
also suppose we want to make a system
that can recognize the face of different
people in an image okay so basically
we're creating a system that can
identify the faces of different people
in an image if we solve this by using
the typical machine learning algorithms
we'll have to Define facial features
like eyes nose ears Etc okay and then
the system will identify which features
are more important for which person now
if you consider deep learning for the
same example deep learning will
automatically find out the features
which are important for classification
because it uses the concept of neural
networks whereas in machine learning we
have to manually Define these features
on our own right that's the main
difference between deep learning and
machine learning now the next question
is how does deep learning work now when
people started coming up with deep
learning their main aim was to
re-engineer the human brain okay deep
learning studies the basic unit of a
brain called the brain cell or a neuron
all of you biology students will know
what I'm talking about so basically deep
learning is inspired from our brain
structure okay in our brains we have
something known as neurons and these
neurons are replicated in deep learning
as artificial neurons which are also
called perceptrons now before we
understand how artificial neural
networks or artificial neurons work
let's understand how these biological
neurons work because I'm not sure how
many of you are bio students over here
so let's uh understand the functionality
of biological neurons and how we can
mimic this functionality in a perceptron
or in an artificial neuron so guys if
you look at this image this is basically
an image of a biological neuron if you
focus on the structure of the biological
neuron it has something known as DDS
these dorids are basically used to
receive inputs now the inputs are
basically summed in the cell body and
it's passed on to the next biological
neuron so through ddes you're going to
receive signals from other neurons
basically input then the cell body will
sum up all these inputs and the axon
will transmit this input to other
neurons the axon will fire up through
some threshold and it will get passed on
to the next neuron so similar to this a
perceptron or an artificial neuron
receives multiple inputs and applies
various Transformations and functions
and provides us an output these multiple
inputs are nothing but your input
variables or your predictor variables
you're feeding input data to an
artificial neuron or to a perceptron and
this perceptron will apply various
functions and Transformations and it
will give you an output now just like
our brain consists of multiple connected
neurons called neural networks we also
build something known as a network of
artificial neurons called artificial
neural networks so that's the basic
concept behind deep learning to sum it
up what exactly is deep learning now
deep learning is a collection of
statistical machine learning techniques
used to learn feature hierarchies based
on the concept of artificial neural
networks so the main idea behind deep
learning is artificial neural networks
which work exactly like how our brain
works now in this diagram you can see
that there are a couple of layers and
the first layer is known as the input
layer this is where you receive all the
inputs the last layer is known as the
output layer which provides your desired
output now all the layers which are
there between your input layer and your
output layer are known as the hidden
layers now there can be n number of
hidden layers uh thanks to all the
resources that we have these days so you
can have hundreds of hidden layers in
between now the number of hidden layers
and the number of perceptrons in each of
these layers will entirely depend on the
problem or on the use case that you're
trying to solve so this is basically how
deep learning works all right so let's
look at the example that we saw earlier
here what we want to do is we want to
perform image recognition using deep
networks first what we're going to do is
we are going to pass this High
dimensional data to the input layer to
match the dimensionality of the input
data the input layer will contain
multiple sublayers of perceptrons so
that it can consume the entire input
okay so you'll have multiple sublayers
of per Rons now the output received from
the input layer will contain patterns
and will only be able to identify the
edges of the images based on the
contrast levels this output will then be
fed to Hidden layer number one where
it'll be able to identify facial
features like your eyes nose ears and
all of that now from here the output
will be fed to Hidden layer number two
where it'll be able to form entire faces
right it'll go deeper into face
recognition and this output of the
Hidden layer will be sent to the output
layer or any other hidden layer that is
there before the output layer now
finally the output layer will perform
classification based on the result that
you get from your previous layers so
this is exactly how deep learning works
this is a small analogy that I used to
make you understand what deep learning
is now let's understand what a single
layer perceptron is so like I said
perceptron is basically an artificial
neuron there's something known as single
layer layer and multiple layer
perceptron we'll first focus on single
layer perceptron now before I explain
what a perceptron really is you should
know that perceptrons are linear
classifiers right a single layer
perceptron is a linear or a binary
classifier it is used mainly in
supervised learning and it helps to
classify the given input data into
separate classes so this diagram
basically represents a perceptron all
right a perceptron has multiple inputs
right it has a set of inputs labeled X1
X2 until xn now each of these input is
given a specific weight okay so W1
represents the weight of input X1 W2
represents the weight of input X2 and so
on now how you assign these weights is a
different thing alog together but for
now you need to know that each input is
assigned a particular weightage now what
the perceptron does is it computes some
function on these weighted inputs and
it'll give you the output so basically
these weighted inputs go through
something known as summation okay
summation is nothing but the product of
each of your input with its respective
weight now after the summation is done
this is passed on to a transfer function
a transfer function is nothing but an
activation function I'll be discussing
more about this in a minute right the
activation function and from the
activation function you'll get the
outputs y1 Y2 and so on so guys you need
to understand four important parts Parts
in a perceptron so firstly you have the
input values right you have X1 X2 X3 you
have something known as weights and bias
and then you have something known as the
net sum and finally the activation
function now all the inputs X are
multiplied with a respective wids so X1
will be multiplied with W1 all right
this is known as the summation now after
this you'll add all the multiplied
values and you'll call them as the
weighted sum all right this is done
using the summation function now you'll
apply the weighted sum to a correct
activation function now a lot of people
have a confusion about activation
function activation function is also
known as the transfer function now in
order to understand activation function
this word uh stems from the way neurons
in a human brain work the neuron becomes
active only after a certain potential is
reached now that threshold is known as
the activation potential therefore
mathematically it can be represented by
a function that reaches saturation after
a threshold okay we have a lot of
activation functions like Signum sigmoid
tan hedge and so on okay you can think
of activation function as a function
that Maps the input to the respective
output now I also spoke about weights
and bias now why do we assign weights to
each of these inputs what weights do is
they show the strength of a particular
input or how important a particular
input is for predicting the fin final
output so basically the weightage of an
input denotes the importance of that
input now a bias basically allows us to
shift the activation function in order
to get a precise output so that was all
about perceptrons now in order to make
you understand perceptrons better let's
look at a small
analogy suppose that you want to go to a
party happening near your house now your
decision will depend on a set of factors
first is how is the weather second is
probably is your wife or your girlfriend
or your boyfriend going with you and
third is is there any public transport
available all right let's say these are
the three factors that you're going to
consider before you go to a party so
depending on these predictor variables
or these features you're going to decide
whether you're going to stay at home or
go and party now how is the weather is
going to be your first input right we'll
represent this with a value X1 is your
wife going with you is another input X2
any public transport is available is
your another input X3 now X1 will have
two values 1 and zero one represents
that the weather is good zero represents
weather is bad similarly one represents
that your wife is going and zero
represents that your wife is not going
and in X3 again one represents that
there is public transport and zero
represents that there is no public
transport now your output will either be
one or zero one means you are going to
the the party and zero means you'll be
sitting at home now in order to
understand weightage let's say that the
most important factor for you is your
weather if the weather is good it means
that you will 100% go to the party now
if your weather is not good you've
decided that you'll sit at home so the
maximum weightage is for your weather
variable so if your weather is really
good you will go to the party it is a
very important factor in order to
understand whether you're going to sit
at home or you're going to go to the the
party so basically if X1 equal to 1 your
output will be 1 meaning that if your
weather is good you'll go to the party
now let's randomly assign weights to
each of our input W1 is the weight
associated with input X1 W2 is the
weight with X2 and W3 is the weight
associated with X3 let's say that your
W1 is 6 your W2 is 2 and W3 is 2 Now by
using the activation function you're
going to set a threshold of five
now this means that it will fire when
the weather is good and won't fire if
the weather is bad irrespective of the
other inputs now here because your
weightage is six so basically if you
consider your first input which has a
weightage of six that means you're 100%
going to go let's say we considering
only the second input this means that
you're not going to go because your
weightage is two and your threshold is
five so if your weightage is below your
threshold it means that you're not going
to go now let's consider another
scenario where a threshold is three this
means that it'll fire when either X1 is
high or the other two inputs are high
now W2 is associated with your wife is
going or not let's say the weather is
bad and you have no public
transportation meaning that your X1 and
X3 is zero and only your X2 is 1 now if
your X2 is 1 your weightage is going to
be two if your weightage is two you will
not go because the threshold value is
set to three the threshold value is set
in such a way that if X2 and X3 are
combined together only then you'll go or
only if X1 is true then you'll go so
you're assigning threshold in such a way
that you will go for sure if the weather
is good right this is how you assign
threshold this is nothing but your
activation function so guys I hope all
of you understood the most amount of
weightage is associated with the input
that is very important in predic ing
your output this is exactly how a
perceptron works now let's look at the
limitations of a perceptron now in a
perceptron there are no hidden layers
right there's only a input layer and
there is an output layer we have no
hidden layers in between and because of
this you cannot classify nonlinearly
separable data points okay if you have
data like in this figure how would you
separate this you cannot use a
perceptron to do this all right so
complex problems that involve a lot of
parameters cannot be solved by a single
layer perceptron that's why we need
something known as multiple layer
perceptron so now we'll discuss
something known as multi-layer
perceptron a multi-layer perceptron has
the same structure of a single layer
perceptron but with one or more hidden
layers okay and that's why it's
considered as a deep neural network so
in a single layer perceptron we had only
a input layer output layer right we
didn't have any hidden layer now when it
comes to multi-layer perceptrons there
are hidden layers in between and then
there is the output layer it works in
the similar manner like I said first
you'll have the inputs X1 X2 X3 and so
on and each of these inputs will be
assigned some weight right W1 W2 W3 and
so on then you'll calculate the weighted
summation of each of these inputs and
their weights after that you'll send
them to the transformation or the
activation function and you'll finally
get the output now the only thing uh is
that you'll have multiple hidden layers
in between one or more than one hidden
layers so guys this is how a multi-layer
perceptron works it works on the concept
of feed forward neural networks feed
forward means every node at each level
or each layer is connected to every
other node so that's what feed forward
networks are now when it comes to
assigning weights what we do is we
randomly assign weights right initially
we have input X1 X2 X3 we randomly ass
assign some weight W1 W2 W3 and so on
now it's always necessary that whatever
weights we assign to our input those
weights are actually correct meaning
that those weights are actually
significant in predicting your output so
how a multi-layer perceptron works is a
set of inputs are passed to the first
hidden layer now the activations from
that layer are passed to the next layer
and from that layer it's passed to the
next hidden layer until you reach the
output layer right from the output layer
you'll form the two classes class one
and class two basically you'll classify
your input into one of the two classes
so that's how a multi-layer perceptron
Works a very important Concept in
multiple layer perceptron is back
propagation now what is back propagation
back propagation algorithm is a
supervised learning method for
multi-layer perceptrons okay now why do
we need back propagation so guys when we
are designing a neural network in the
beginning we initialize weights with
some random values or any variable for
that fact now obviously we need to make
sure that these weights actually are
correct meaning that these weights show
the significance of each predictor
variable these weights have to fit our
model in such a way that our output is
very precise so let's say that we
randomly selected some weights in the
beginning but our model output is much
more different than our actual output
meaning that our eror error value is
very huge so how will you reduce this
error basically what you need to do is
we need to somehow explain to the model
that we need to change the weights in
such a way that the error becomes
minimum so the main thing is the weights
and your error is very highly related
the weightage that you give to each
input will show how much error is there
in your output because the most
significant variables will have the
highest weightage and if the weightage
is not correct then your output is also
not correct now back propagation is a
way to update your weights in such a way
that your outcome is precise and your
error is reduced so in short back
propagation is used to train a
multi-layer perceptron it's basically
used to update your weights in such a
way that your output is more precise and
that your error is reduced so training a
neural network is all about back
propagation so the most common deep
learning algorithm for supervised train
of the multi-layer perceptron is known
as back propagation so after calculating
the weighted sum of inputs and passing
them through the activation function we
propagate backwards and update the
weight to reduce the error it's as
simple as that so in the beginning
you're going to assign some weights to
each of your input now these inputs will
go through the activation function and
it'll go through all the hidden layers
and give us an output now when you get
the output the output is not very
precise size or it is not the desired
output so what you do is you propagate
backwards and you start updating your
weights in such a way that your error is
as minimum as possible so I'm going to
repeat this once more so the idea behind
back propagation is to choose weights in
such a way that your error gets
minimized to understand this we'll look
at a small example let's say that we
have a data set which has these labels
okay your input is 0 1 2 but your
desired out output is 0 1 and 4 now the
output of your model when w = to 3 is
like this notice the difference between
your model output and your desired
output so your model output is three but
your desired output is two okay
similarly when your model output is six
your desired output is supposed to be
four now let's calculate the error when
weight is equal to three the error is
zero over here because your desired
output is zero and your model output is
also zero now the error in the second
case is one basically your model output
minus your desired output 3 - 2 your
error is 1 similarly your error for the
third input is 2 which is 6 - 4 when you
take the square this is actually a very
huge difference right your error becomes
larger now what we need to do is we need
to update the weight value in such a way
that our error decreases now here we've
considered the weight as four so when
you consider the weight as 4 your model
output becomes 0 4 and 8 your desired
output is 0 2 and four so your model
output becomes 0 4 and 8 which is a lot
so guys I hope you all know how to
calculate the output over here what I'm
doing is I'm multiplying the input with
your weightage the weightage is four so
0 into 4 will give me 0er 1 into 4 will
give me 4 and 2 into 4 will give me 8
right that's how I'm getting my model
output over here for now this is how I'm
getting the output over here that's how
you calculate your weightage now here if
you see that our desired output is
supposed to be 0 2 and 4 but we're
getting an output of 0 4 and 8 so our
error is actually increasing as we
increase our weight our error for w
equal 4 has become 0 4 and 16 whereas
the error for wal 3 was 0 1 and 4 I mean
the square error so if you look at this
as as we increase our weightage our
error is increasing so obviously we know
that there is no point in increasing the
value of w further but if we decrease
the value of w our error actually
decreases right if we give a weightage
of two our error decreases so if we can
find a relationship between our weight
and error basically if you increase the
weight your error also increases if you
decrease the weight your error also
decreases now what we did here is we
first in initialize some random value to
W and then we propagate it forward then
we notice that there is some error and
to reduce that error we propagate it
backwards and increase the value of w
after that we notice that the error has
increased and we came to know that we
can't increase the W value obviously if
your error is increasing with increasing
your weight you will not increase the
weight so again we propagated backwards
and we decreased the W value so after
that we noticed that the error has
reduced so what we're trying is we're
trying to get the value of weight in
such a way that the error becomes as
minimum as possible so we need to figure
out whether we need to increase or
decrease the weight value once we know
that we keep on updating the weight
value in that direction until the error
becomes minimum now you might reach a
point where if you further update the
weight the error will again increase at
that point you need to stop okay that
point is where your final weight value
is there so basically this graph denotes
that point now this point is nothing but
the global loss minimum if you update
the weights further yours error will
also increase now you need to find out
where your Global loss minimum is and
that is where your Optimum weight lies
so let me summarize the steps for you
first you'll calculate the error okay
this is how far your model output is
from your actual output then you'll
check whether the error is minimized or
not after that if the error is very huge
then you'll update the weight and you'll
check the error again right you'll
repeat the process until the error
becomes minimum now once you reach the
global loss minimum you'll stop updating
the weights and you will finalize your
weight value this is exactly how back
propagation works now in order to tell
you mathematically what we're doing is
we're using a method known as gradient
descent okay this method is used to
adjust all the weights in the network
with an aim of reducing the error at the
output layer so how gradient descent
Optimizer works is the first step is you
will calculate the error by considering
the below equation here you're
subtracting the summation of your actual
output from your network output step two
is based on the error you get you will
calculate the rate of change of error
with respect to the change in the weight
the learning rate is something that you
set in the beginning itself step three
is based on this change in weight you
will calculate the new weight all right
your updated weight will be your weight
plus the rate of change of weight so
guys that was all about back propagation
and weight update now let's look at the
limitations of feed forward Network so
far we were discussing the multiple uh
layer perceptron which uses the feed
forward Network now let's discuss the
limitations of these feedforward
networks now let's consider an example
of image classification okay let's say
you've trained the neural network to
classify images of various animals now
let's consider an example here the first
output is an elephant right we have an
elephant and this output will have
nothing to do with the previous output
which is a dog this means that the
output at time T is independent of the
output at time T minus one now consider
the scenario where you will require the
use of previously obtained output okay
the concept is very similar to reading a
book as you turn every page you need an
understanding of the previous Pages if
you want to make sense of the
information then you need to know what
you learned before it's exactly what
you're doing right now in order to
understand deep learning you had to
understand machine learning so basically
with a feed forward Network the new
output at time t+1 has nothing to do
with the output at time t or T minus one
or tus2 so feed for networks cannot be
used while predicting a word in a
sentence as it will have absolutely no
relationship with a previous set of
words so a feed forward Network cannot
be used in use cases wherein you have to
predict the outcome based on your
previous outcome so in a lot of use
cases your previous output will also
determine your next output so for such
cases you cannot make use of feed
forward Network now what modification
can you make so that your network can
learn from your previous mistakes for
this we have a solution so a solution to
this is recurrent neural networks so
basically let's say you have an input at
time T minus one and you'll get some
output when you feed it to the network
now some information from this input at
T minus one is fed to the next input
which is input at time T some
information from this output is fed into
the next input which is input at T +1 so
basically you keep feeding information
from the previous input to the next
input that's how recurrent neural
networks really work so recurrent
networks are a type of artificial neural
networks designed to recognize patterns
in sequence of data such as text genomes
handwriting spoken words time series
data sensors talk markets and government
agencies so guys record and neural
networks are actually a very important
part of deep learning because recurent
neural networks have applications in a
lot lot of domains okay in Time series
and in stock markets the main networks
that I use are recurent neural networks
because each of your inputs are
correlated now to better understand
recurrent neural networks let's consider
a small example let's say that you go to
the gym regularly and the trainer has
given you a schedule for your workout so
basically the exercises are repeated
after every third day okay this is what
your schedule looks like so make a note
that all these these exercises are
repeated in a proper order or in a
sequence every week first let us use a
feed forward Network to try and predict
the type of exercise that we're going to
do the inputs here are day of the week
the month and your health status okay so
a neural network has to be trained using
these inputs to provide us with the
prediction of the exercises that we
should do now let's try and understand
the same thing using recurrent neural
networks in recurrent neural networks
what we'll do is we'll consider the
inputs of the previous day okay so if
you did a shoulder workout yesterday
then you can do a bicep exercise today
and this goes on for the rest of the
week however if you happen to miss a day
at the gym the data from the previously
attended time stamps can be considered
right it can be done like this so if a
model is trained based on the data it
can obtain from the previous exercise
the output from the model will be
extremely accurate in such cases you
need to know the output at T minus one
in order to predict the output at d
right in such cases recurent neural
networks are very essential so basically
on feeding some inputs to the neural
networks you'll go through a few
functions and you'll get the output so
basically you're predicting the output
based on past information or based on
your past input so that's how recurrent
neural networks work now let's look at
another type of neural network known as
convolutional neural network to
understand why we need convolutional
neural neural networks let's look at an
analogy how do you think a computer
reads an image okay consider this image
okay this is a New York skyline image on
the first glance you'll see a lot of
buildings and a lot of colors now how
does a computer process this image the
image is actually broken down into three
color channels which is red green and
blue all right it reads in the form of
RGB values now each of these color
channels are mapped to the images pixel
then the computer will recognize the
value associated with each pixel and
determine the size of the image now for
the black and white images there is only
one channel but the concept is still the
same the thing is we cannot make use of
fully connected networks when it comes
to convolutional neural networks I'll
tell you why now consider the first
input image okay first image has a size
about 28 into 28 into 3 pixels and uh if
we input this to our neural network
we'll get about 2,00
352 weights in the first hidden layer
itself now consider another example okay
let's say we have an image of 200 into
200 into 3 pixels so the size of your
first hidden layer becomes around
120,000 now if this is just the first
hidden layer imagine the number of
neurons that you need to process an
entire complex image set right this
leads to something known as overfitting
because all of the Hidden layers are
connected they are massively connected
there's connection between each and
every node because of this we face
overfitting right we have way too much
of data we have to use way too many
neurons which is not practical so that's
why we have something known as
convolutional neural networks now
convolutional neural networks like any
other neural network are made up of
neurons with learnable weights and bases
so each neuron receives several inputs
it takes a weighted sum over them and it
gets passed on through some activation
function and finally responds with an
output so the concept in convolution
neural networks is that the neuron in a
particular layer will only be connected
to a small region of the layer before it
not all the neurons will be connected in
a fully connected manner which leads to
overfitting because we need way too many
neurons to solve this problem only the
regions which are significant are
connected to each other all right there
is no full Connection in convolution
neural networks so guys what we did so
far is we disc discussed what a
perceptron is we discussed the different
types of neural networks that are there
right we discuss a feed forward neural
network we discussed multi-layer
perceptrons we discussed recurrent
neural networks and convolutional neural
networks I'm not going to go too much in
depth with these Concepts now I'll be
executing a demo if you haven't
understood any theoretical concept of
deep learning please let me know in the
comment section right apart from this
I'll also leave a couple of links in the
description box so that you understand
the whole deep learning in a better way
okay if you want a more in-depth
explanation I'll leave a couple of links
in the description box for now what I'm
going to do is I'll be running a
practical demonstration to show you what
exactly deep learning does so basically
what we're going to do in this demo is
we're going to predict stock prices and
like I said stock price prediction is
one of the very uh good applications of
deep neural networks you can easily
predict the stock price of a particular
stock for the next minute or the next
day by using deep neural networks right
so that's exactly what we're going to do
in this demo now before I discuss the
code let me tell you a few things about
our data set okay the data set contains
around 42,000 minutes of data ranging
from April to August 2017 on 500 stocks
as well as the total S&P 500 index price
so the index and stocks are arranged in
a wide format so this is my data set
dataor stocks it's in the CSV format so
what I'm going to do is I'm going to use
the read CSV function in order to import
this data set right this is just the
path of where my data set is stored this
data set was actually cleaned and
prepared meaning that we don't have any
missing stock and index prices so the
file does not contain any missing values
now what we're going to do first is
we'll drop the date variable we have a
variable known as date which is not
really necessary in predicting our
outcome come over here so that's exactly
what I'm doing here I'm just dropping
the date variable so here I'm just
checking the dimensions of the data set
right this is pretty understandable
you're using the shape function to do
that now always you make the data as a
numpy array right this makes computation
much easier the next process is the data
splicing I've already discussed data
splicing with you all here we're just
preparing the training and the testing
data so the training data will contain
80% of the total data set okay and ALS
so we are not shuffling the data set
we're just slicing the data set
sequentially right that's why we have a
test start and the test end variable in
sequence itself is selecting the data
there's no need of shuffling this data
set right these are stock prices it does
not make sense to shuffle this data now
the next step we're going to do is we're
going to scale the data now scaling data
and data normalization is one of the
most important steps all right you
cannot miss this step I already
mentioned earlier what normalizing ation
and scaling is now most neural networks
benefit from scaling inputs this is
because most common activation functions
of the network neurons such as tan hedge
and sigmoid tan HED and sigmoid are
basically activation functions and these
are defined in the range of minus1 to 1
or 0o and 1 so that's why scaling is an
important thing in deep neural networks
for scaling again we'll use the minmax
scaler all right so we're just importing
that function over here and also want
point to note is that you have to be
very cautious about what part of data
you're scaling and when you're doing it
a very common mistake is to scale the
whole data set before training and test
splits are being applied all right so
before data splicing itself you
shouldn't be scaling your data now this
is a mistake because scaling invokes the
calculation of statistics for example
minimum or maximum uh range of the
variable gets affected so when
performing uh Time series forecasting in
real life you do not have information
from future observations at the time of
forecasting that's why calculation of
scaling statistics has to be conducted
on training data and only then it has to
be applied to the test data otherwise
you're basically using the future
information at the time of forecasting
which is obviously going to lead to
biasness right so that's why you need to
make sure you do scaling very accurately
so basically what we're doing is the
number of features in the training data
are stored in a variable known as end
stocks after this we'll import the
infamous tensorflow so guys tensorflow
is actually a very uh good piece of
software and it is currently the leading
deep learning and neural network
computation framework right it is based
on a C++ lowlevel back end but it's
usually controlled through python so T
oflow actually operates as a graphical
representation of your computations and
this is important because neural
networks are actually graphs of data and
mathematical operations so that's why
tensor flow is just perfect for neural
networks and deep learning so the next
thing after importing the tensorflow
library is something known as
placeholders placeholders are used to
store input and Target data right we
need two placeholders in order to fit a
model so basically X will contain the
network input which is the stock prices
of all the uh stocks at time t equal to
T and why will contain the Network's
output which is the stock price at time
T is equal to t + 1 now the shape of the
X Place holder u means that the inputs
are a two-dimensional Matrix and the
outputs are a one-dimensional vector so
guys basically the nonone argument
indicates that at this point we do not
yet know the number of observations that
will flow through the neural network we
just keep it as a flexible array for now
we will later Define the variable bat
side is that controls the number of
observations in each training batch all
right now apart from this we also have
something known as
initializers now uh before I tell you
what these initializers are you need to
understand that there's something known
as variables that are used as flexible
containers that are allowed to change
during the execution weights and bias
are represented as variables in order to
adapt during training I already
discussed weights and bias with you
earlier here now weights and bias is
something that you need to initialize
before you train the model right that's
how we discussed it even uh while I was
explaining neural networks to you so
here basically we make use of something
known as variance scaling initializer
and for B initializer we make use of Zer
initializers these are some predefined
functions in our tensorflow module right
we'll not get into the depth of those
things now let's look at our model
architecture parameters so the next
thing we have to disc discuss is the
model architecture parameters now the
model that we built it consists of four
hidden layers for the first layer we
have assigned 1024 neurons which is
slightly more than double the size of
the inputs the subsequent hidden layers
are always half the size of the previous
layer which means that in the hidden
layer number two we'll have 512 neurons
hidden layer three will have 256 and
similarly hidden layer number four will
have 128 neurons now why do we keep
reducing the number of neurons as we go
through each hidden layer we do this
because the number of neurons for each
subsequent layer compresses the
information that the network identifies
in the previous layer of course there
are other possible Network architectures
that you can apply for this problem
statement but I'm trying to keep it as
simple as possible because I'm
introducing deep learning to you all so
I can't build a model architecture
that's very complex and hard to explain
and of course we have our output over
here which will be assigned a single
neuron now it is very important to
understand the variable Dimensions
between your input hidden and output
layers so as a rule of thumb in
multi-layer perceptrons the second
dimension of the previous layer is the
First Dimension in the current layer so
the second dimension in my first hidden
layer is going to be my first dimension
in my second hidden layer now the reason
behind this is pretty logical it's
because the output from the first hidden
layer is passed on as an input to the
second hidden layer that's why the
second dimension of the previous layer
is the same as the first dimension of
the next layer or the current layer all
right I hope this is understandable now
coming to the biased Dimension over here
the bias Dimension is always equal to
the second dimension of your current
layer meaning that you're just going to
pass the number of neurons in that
particular hidden layer as your
dimension in your bias so here the
number of neurons are 1024 you're
passing the same number as a parameter
to your bias similarly even for hidden
layer number two if you see our second
dimension here is n neurons uncore 2 I'm
passing the same parameter over here as
well similarly for hidden layer three
and hidden layer number
four right I hope this is understandable
now we come to the output layer the
output layer will obviously have the
output from hidden layer number four
this is our output from hidden layer
four that's passed as the First
Dimension in our output layer and it'll
finally have your end Target which is
set to one over here right this is our
output your bias will basically have the
current layer's Dimension which is end
Target we're passing that same parameter
over
here now after you define the required
weight and the bias variables the
architecture of the network has to be
specified what you do is placeholders
and variables need to be combined into a
system of sequential matrix
multiplication so that's exactly what's
happening over here apart from this all
the hidden layers need to be transformed
right by using the activation function
so activation functions are important
components of the network because they
introduce nonlinearity to the system
right this means that high dimensional
data can be dealt with with the help of
activation functions obviously we have
very high dimensional data when it comes
to neural networks we don't have a
single Dimension or you know we don't
have two or three inputs we have
thousands and thousands of inputs so in
order for our neural network to process
that much of high dimensional data we
need something known as activation
functions right that's why we make use
of activation functions now there are
dozens of activation functions and one
of the most common one is the rectified
linear unit rectified linear unit Ru is
nothing but rectified linear unit which
is what we're going to be using using in
this model so after you apply the
transformation function to your hidden
layer you need to make sure that your
output is transposed this is followed by
a very important function known as cost
function so the cost function of a
network is used to generate a measure of
deviation between the Network's
prediction and the actual observed
training targets so this is basically
your actual output minus your model
output it basically calculates the error
between your actual output and your
predicted output so for regression
problems the mean squared error function
is commonly used right I have discussed
msse mean squared error before so
basically we just measuring the
deviation over here right msse is
nothing but your deviation from your
actual output all right that's exactly
what we're doing here so after you've
computed your error the next step is
obviously to update your weight and your
bias so we have something known as the
optimizers they basically take care of
all the necessary computations that are
needed to adapt the Network's weight and
bias variables during the training phase
right that's exactly what's happening
over here now the main function of this
Optimizer is that it invokes something
known as the gradient now if you all
remember we discussed gradient before it
basically indicates the direction in
which the weights and the bias have to
be changed during the training in order
to minimize the network cost function or
the network error so you need to figure
out whether you need to increase the
weight and the bias in order to decrease
the error or is it the other way around
right you need to understand the
relationship between your error and your
weight variable right that's exactly
what the optimizer does it invokes the
gradient which will give you the
direction in which the weights and the
bias have to be changed right so now
that you know what an Optimizer does in
our module we'll be using something
known as the adom optimizer this is one
of the current default optimizers in
deep learning Adam basically stands for
adaptive moment estimation and it can be
considered as a combination between very
two popular optimizers called adagrad
and RMS prop now let's not get into the
depth of the optimizers the main agenda
here is for you to understand the logic
behind deep learning we don't have to go
into the functions and all these are
predefined functions which tensor FL
takes care of next we have something
known as initializers now initializer
are used to initialize the network
variables before training we already
discussed this before now I Define the
initializer here again I'd already done
it earlier in this session right
initializers are already defined so I
just removed that line of code Next Step
would be fitting the neural network so
after we've defined the placeholders the
variables variables which are basically
weights and bias the initializers the
cost functions and the optimizers of the
network the the model has to be trained
now this is usually done by using the
mini batch Training Method because we
have a very huge data set right so it's
always best to use the mini batch
Training Method now what happens during
mini batch training is random data
samples of any bat size are drawn from
the training data and they are fed into
the network so the training data set
gets divided into n divided by your
batch size batches that are sequentially
fed into the network so one after the
other each of these batches will be fed
into the network at this point the
placeholders which are your X and Y they
come into play they store the input and
the target data and present them to the
network as inputs and targets that's the
main functionality of placeholders what
they do is they store the input and the
target data and they provide this to the
network as inputs and targets that's
exactly what your placeholders do so
let's say that a sampled data batch of x
right now this data batch flows through
the network until it reaches the output
layer there the tens of flow compares
the models predictions against the
actual observed targets which is stored
in y if you all remember we stored our
actual observed Targets in y after this
tensor flow will conduct something known
as optimization step and it'll update
the Network's parameters like the weight
of the network and the bias so after
having updated your weight and the bias
the next batch is sampled and the
process gets repeated so this procedure
will continue until all the batches have
presented to the network and one full
sweep over all batches is known as an
Epoch so I've defined this entire thing
over here so we are going to go through
10 epochs meaning that all the batches
are going to go through training meaning
you're going to input each batch that is
X and it will flow through the network
until it reaches the output layer there
what happens is tens oflow will compare
your predictions that is basically what
your model predicted against the actual
observed targets which is stored in y
after this tensorflow will perform
optimization wherein it'll update the
network parameters like your weight and
your bias after you update the weight
and the bias the next batch will get
sampled and the process will keep
repeating right this happens until all
the batches are implemented in the
network so what I just told you was one
Epoch we're going to repeat this 10
times so our batch size is 256 meaning
that we have 256 batches so here we're
going to assign X and Y what I just
spoke to you about the mini batch
training starts over here so basically
your first batch will start flowing
through the network until it reaches the
output layer after this tensor flow We
compare your models prediction this is
where predictions happen it'll compare
your models prediction to the actual
observed targets which is stored in y
then tensorflow will start doing
optimization and it'll update the
network parameters like your weight and
your bias so after you update the weight
and the biases the next batch will get
input into the network and this process
will keep repeating this process will
repeat 10 times because we've defined 10
epochs now also during the training we
evaluate the network predictions on the
test set which is basically the data
which we haven't learned but this data
is set aside for every fifth batch and
this is visualized so in our problem
statement what our network is going to
do is it's going to predict the stock
price continuously over a time period of
t+ 1 right we're feeding it data about
the stock price at time T it's going to
give us an output of time t + 1 now let
me run this code and let's see how close
our predicted values are to the actual
values we're going to visualize this
entire thing and we've also exported
this in order to combine it into a video
animation right I'll show you what the
video looks like so now now let's look
at our visualization we look at our
output so the orange basically shows our
models prediction so the model quickly
learns the shape and the location of the
time series in the test data and showing
us an accurate prediction right it's
pretty close to the actual prediction
now as I'm explaining this to you each
batch is running here right we are at
aepo 2 we have 10 epochs to go over here
so you can see that the network is
actually adapting to the basic shape of
the time series and it's learned
learning finer patterns in the data you
see it keeps learning patterns and the
prediction is getting closer and closer
after every EPO so let's just wait till
we reach AO 10 and we complete the
entire process
right so guys I think the predictions
are pretty close like the pattern and
the shape is learned very well by our
neural network it is actually mimicking
this network the only deviation is in
the values apart from that it's learning
the shape of the time series data in
almost the same way the shape is exactly
the same it looks very similar to me now
also remember that there are a lot of
ways of improving your result you can
change the design of your layers or you
can change the number of neurons you can
choose different initialization
functions and activation functions you
can introduce something known as Dropout
layers which basically help you to get
rid of overfitting and there's also
something known as early stopping early
stopping helps you understand where you
must stop your batch training that's
also another method that you can
Implement for improving your model now
there are also different types of deep
learning models that you can use for
this problem here we use the feed
forward Network which basically means
that the batches will flow from left to
right okay so our 10 EPO are over now
the final thing that's getting
calculated is our error msse or mean
squared error so guys don't worry about
this warning right it's just a warning
so our mean Square squ error comes down
to
0.029 which is pretty low because the
target is scaled and this means that our
accuracy is pretty good so guys like I
mentioned if you want to improve the
accuracy of the model you can use
different schemes you can use different
initialization functions or you can try
out different transformation functions
you can use something known as Dropout
technique and early stopping in order to
make the training phase even more better
yeah so guys that was the end of our
deep learning demo Mo right I hope all
of you understood the Deep learning demo
for those of you who are just learning
deep learning for the first time it
might be a little confusing so if you
have any doubts regarding the demo let
me know in the comment section right
I'll also leave a couple of links in the
description box so that you can
understand deep learning in a little
more depth now let's look at our final
topic for today which is natural
language processing now before we
understand what text mining is and what
natural language processing is we have
to understand the need for text Mining
and natural language processing so guys
the number one reason why we need text
Mining and natural language processing
is because of the amount of data that
we're generating during this time right
like I mentioned earlier there are
around 2.5 quintilian bytes of data that
is created every day and this number is
only going to grow with the evolution of
communication through social media we
generate tons and tons of data right the
numbers are on your screen now these
numbers are literally for every minute
on Instagram every minute 1.7 million
pictures are posted okay 1.7 or more
than 1.7 million pictures are posted
similarly we have tweets we have around
347,000 tweets every minute on Twitter
this is actually a lot and lot of data
right so every time we're using a phone
we're generating way too much data just
watching a video on YouTube is
generating a lot of data when you're
sending text messages from WhatsApp that
is also generating tons and tons of data
now the only problem is not our data
generation the problem is that out of
all the data that we're generating only
21% of the data is structured and well
formatted the remaining of the data is
unstructured and the major sources of
unstructured data include text messages
from WhatsApp Facebook likes comments on
Instagram bulk emails that we sent out
every single day all of this accounts
for the unstructured data that we have
today now the question here is what can
done with so much data now the data that
we generate can be used to grow
businesses by analyzing and Mining the
data we can add more value to a business
this is exactly what text mining is all
about so text mining or text analytics
is the analysis of data available to us
in a day-to-day spoken or written
language it is amazing that so much data
that we generate can actually be used in
text mining we have data from Word
Documents PowerPoints chat messages
emails all of this is used to add value
to a business now the data that we get
from sources like social media iot they
are mainly unstructured and unstructured
data cannot be used to draw useful
insights to grow a business that's
exactly why we need text mining text
mining or text analytics is the process
of deriving meaningful information from
natural language text so all the data
that we generate through text messages
emails documents files are written in
natural language text and we are going
to use text Mining and natural language
processing to draw useful insights or
patterns from such data now let's look
at a few examples to show you how
natural language processing and text
mining is used so now before I move any
further I want to compare text Mining
and NLP a lot of you might be confused
about what exactly text mining is and
how is it related to natural language
processing a lot of people have also
asked me why is NLP and text min
considered as one and the same and are
they the same thing so basically text
mining is a vast field that makes use of
natural language processing to derive
high quality information from the text
so basically text mining is a process
and natural language processing is a
method used to carry out text mining so
in a way you can say that text mining is
the vast field which uses NLP in order
to perform text analysis and text mining
right so NLP is a part of of text mining
now let's understand what exactly
natural language processing is now
natural language processing is a
component of text mining which basically
helps a machine in reading the text
obviously machines don't actually know
English or French right they interpret
data in the form of zeros and ones so
this is where natural language
processing comes in NLP is what
computers and smartphones used to
understand our language both spoken and
written language now because we use
language to interact with our device NLP
became an integral part of our life NLP
uses concepts of computer science and
artificial intelligence to study the
data and derive useful information from
it now before we move any further let's
look at a few applications of NLP and
text mining now we all spend a lot of
time surfing the web have you ever
noticed that if you start typing a word
on Google you immediately get
suggestions like these this feature is
also known known as aut to complete it
will basically suggest the rest of the
word for you and we also have something
known as spam detection here is an
example of how Google recognizes the
misspelling Netflix and shows results
for keywords that match your misspelling
so the spam detection is also based on
the concepts of text Mining and natural
language processing next we have
predictive typing and spell Checkers
features like autocorrect email
classification are all applications of
text Mining and NLP
now we look at a couple of more
applications of natural language
processing we have something known as
sentimental analysis now sentimental
analysis is extremely useful in social
media monitoring because it allows us to
gain an overview of The Wider public
opinion behind certain topics so
basically sentimental analysis is used
to understand The public's opinion or
customer opinion on a certain product or
on a certain topic sentimental analysis
is actually a very huge part of a lot of
social media platforms like Twitter
Facebook they use sentimental analysis
very frequently then we have something
known as chatbot chat Bots are basically
the solutions for all the consumer
frustration regarding customer call
assistance so we have companies like
Piza Hut Uber who have started using
chatbots to provide good customer
service apart from that speech
recognition NLP has widely been used in
speech recognition we're all aware of
Alexa Siri Google assistant and cotana
these are all applications of natural
language processing machine translation
is another important application of NLP
an example of this is the Google
translator that uses NLP to process and
translate one language to the other
other applications include spell
Checkers keyword search information
extraction and NLP can be used to get
useful information from various websites
from Word documents from files and Etc
it can also be used in advertisement
matching
this basically means recommendation of
ads based on your history so now that
you have a basic understanding of where
natural language processing is used and
what exactly it is let's take a look at
some important Concepts so firstly we're
going to discuss about tokenization now
tokenization is the most basic step in
text mining tokenization basically means
breaking down data into smaller chunks
or tokens so that they can be easily
analyzed now how tokenization works is
it works by breaking a complex sentence
into words right so you're breaking a
huge sentence into words you'll
understand the importance of each of the
word with respect to the whole sentence
after which you'll produce a description
on an input sentence so for example
let's say we have this sentence tokens
are simple if we apply tokenization on
this sentence what we get is this right
we're just breaking a sentence into
words then we understand understanding
the importance of each of these words
right we'll perform NLP process on each
of these words to understand how
important each word is in this entire
sentence for me I think tokens and
simple are important words are is
basically another stop word we'll be
discussing about stop wordss in our
further slides but for now you need to
understand that tokenization is a very
simple process that involves breaking
sentences into words next we have
something known as stemming stemming is
basically normalizing words into its
base form or into its root form take a
look at this example we have words like
detection detecting detected and
detections now we all know that the root
word for all these words is detect
basically all these words mean detect so
the stemming algorithm works by cutting
off the end or the beginning of the word
and taking into account a list of common
prefixes and suffixes that can be found
in any word word so guys stemming can be
successful in some cases but not always
that is why a lot of people affirm that
stemming has a lot of limitations so in
order to overcome the limitations of
stemming we have something known as
lemmatization now what lemmatization
does is it takes into consideration the
morphological analysis of the words to
do so it is necessary to have a detailed
dictionary which the algorithm can look
through to link the form back to its
Lemma so basically lemmatization is also
quite similar to stemming right it Maps
different words into one common root now
sometimes what happens in stemming is
that most of the word gets cut off let's
say we wanted to cut detection into
detect sometimes it becomes deep or it
becomes Tech or something like that so
because of this the grammar or the
importance of the word goes away right
you don't know what the word means
anymore due to the indiscriminate
cutting of the the word sometimes the
grammar or the understanding of the word
is not there anymore so that's why
lemmatization was introduced the output
of lemmatization is always going to be a
proper word okay it's not going to be
something that is half cut or anything
like that right you're going to
understand the morphological analysis
and then only you're going to perform
lemmatization an example of a lemmatizer
is you're going to convert gone going
and went into go all the three words any
way mean the same thing so you're going
to convert it into go we not removing
the first and the last part of the word
what we're doing is we're understanding
the grammar behind the word we
understanding the English or the
morphological analysis of the word and
only then we are going to perform
lemmatization that's what lemmatization
is all about now stop words are
basically a set of commonly used words
in any language not just English now the
reason why stop words are critical to
many applications is that if we remove
the words that are very commonly used in
a given language we can finally focus on
the important words for example in the
context of a search engine let's say you
open up Google and you try how to make
strawberry milkshake what the search
engine is going to do is it's going to
find a lot more pages that contain the
terms how to make rather than Pages
which contain the recipe for your
strawberry milkshake now that's why you
have to disregard these terms right the
search engine can actually focus on your
strawberry milkshake recipe instead of
looking for pages that have how to and
so on so that's why you need to remove
these stop words right stop words are
how to begin gone various and the all of
these are stop words they are not
necessarily important to understand the
importance of the sentence so you get
rid of these commonly used words so that
you can focus on the actual keywords
another term you need to understand is
document term Matrix a document term
Matrix is basically a matrix with
documents designated by rows and words
by columns so if your document one has
this sentence this is fun or has these
words this is fun then you're going to
get one one one over here in document
two if you see we have this and we have
is but we do not have fun so that's what
a document term Matrix is it is
basically to understand whether your
document contains each of these words
right that is a frequency Matrix that is
what a document term Matrix is now let's
move on and look at a natural language
processing demo all right so what we're
going to do is we're going to perform
sentimental analysis now like I said
sentimental analysis is one of the most
popular applications of natural language
processing it refers to the process of
determining whether a given piece of
text or a given sentence of text is
positive or negative so in some
variations we consider a sentence to
also be neutral that's a third option
and this technique is commonly used to
discover how people feel about a
particular topic or what are people's
opinions about a particular topic so
this is mainly used to analyze the
sentiments of users in various forms
such as in marketing campaigns in social
media and e-commerce websites and so on
so now we'll be performing sentimental
analysis using python so we are going to
perform natural language processing by
using the naive bias classifier that's
why we are importing the naive bias
classifier so guys python provides a
library known as natural language
toolkit this Library contains all the
functions that are needed to perform
natural language processing also in this
Library we have a predefined data set
called movie reviews what we're going to
do is we're going to download that from
our nltk which is natural language
toolkit we're basically going to run our
analysis on this movie review data set
right that's exactly what we're doing
over here now what we're doing is we're
defining a function in order to extract
features right so this is our function
is just going to extract all our words
now that we've extracted the data we
need to train it so we'll do that by
using our movie reviews data set that we
just downloaded we're going to
understand the positive words and the
negative words so what we're doing here
is we're just loading our positive and
our negative reviews we're loading both
of them after that we'll separate each
of these into positive features and
negative features this is pretty
understandable next we'll split the data
into our training and testing set now
this is something that we've been doing
for all our demos this is also known as
data splicing right we've also set a
threshold factor of 0.8 which basically
means that 80% of your data set will
belong to your training and 20% will be
for your testing you're going to do this
even for your positive and your negative
words after that you're just extracting
the features again and you're just
printing the number of training data
points that you have right you're just
printing the length of your training
features and you're printing the length
of your testing features we can see the
output let's run this
program so if you see that we're getting
the number of training data points as
1,600 and your number of testing data
points are 400 there's an 80 to 20 %
ratio over here after this we'll be
using the knif bu classifier and we'll
Define the object for The knif Bu
classifier which is basically classifier
and we'll train this using our training
data set we'll also look at the accuracy
of our model the accuracy of our
classifier is around 73% which is a
really good number now this classifier
object will actually contain the most
informative words that are obtained
during analysis these words are
basically essential in understanding
which word is classified as positive and
which is classified as negative what
we're doing here is we're going to
review movies we're going to see which
movie review is positive or which movie
review is negative now this classifier
will basically have all the informative
words that will help us decide which is
a positive review or a negative review
then we're just printing these 10 most
informative
words we have outstanding insulting
vulnerable l
uninvolving astounding avoids
Fascination and so on these are the most
important words in our text now what
we're going to do is we're going to test
our model I've randomly given some
reviews right if you want let's add
another review we'll
say I loved
the
movie so I've added another review over
here here we're just printing the review
and we're checking if this is a posit
positive review or a negative review now
let's look at our predictions right
we'll save this
and I forgot to put a comma over here
save it and let's run the file
again so these were our randomly written
movie reviews the predicted sentiment is
positive our probability score was 0.61
right it's pretty accurate here now this
is a dull movie and I would never
recommend it is a negative sentiment the
cinematography is pretty great right
that's a positive review the movie is
pathetic is obviously a negative review
the direction was terrible and the story
was all over the place now this is also
considered as a negative review
similarly I loved the movie is what I
just inputed and I've got a positive
review on that so our classifi actually
works really well it's giving us good
accuracy and it's classifying the
sentiments very accurately so guys this
was all about sentimental analysis here
we basically saw if a movie review was
positive or negative so guys that was
all for our NLP demo I hope all of you
understood this it was a simple
sentimental analysis that we saw through
python so again if you have doubts
please leave them in the comment section
and I'll help you with all of the
queries so guys that was our last module
which was on language processing now
before I end today's session I would
like to discuss with you the machine
learning Engineers program that we have
at edureka so we all are aware of the
demand for a machine learning engineer
so at edureka we have a Masters program
that involves 200 plus hours of
interactive training so the machine
learning Masters program at edureka has
around nine modules and 200 plus hours
of Interactive Learning so let me tell
tell you the curriculum that this course
provides so your first module will
basically cover Python Programming right
it'll have all the basics and all your
data visualizations your GUI programming
your functions and your objectoriented
Concepts the second module will cover
machine learning with python so your
supervised algorithms and unsupervised
algorithms along with Statistics and
time series in Python will be covered in
your second module your third module
will have graphical modeling this is
quite important when it comes to machine
learning here you'll be thought about
decision making graph Theory inference
and basion and Markov networks module
number four will cover reinforcement
learning in depth right here you'll
understand dynamic programming temporal
difference Bellman equations all the
concepts of reinforcement learning in
depth right all the detailed and
advanced concepts of reinforcement
learning so module number five will
cover NLP with python you'll understand
tokenization stemming lemmatization
syntax tree passing and so on and module
number six will have artificial
intelligence and deep learning with
tensor flow right this module is a very
Advanced version of all your machine
learning and reinforcement learning that
you learned deep learning will be in
depth over here you'll be using
tensorflow throughout they'll cover all
the concepts that we saw CNN RNN it'll
cover the various type of neural
networks like convolutional neural
networks recurrent neural networks long
short-term memory neural networks and
auto encoders and so on the seventh
module is all about py spark right it'll
show you how spark SQL works and all the
features and functions of spark ml
library and the last module will finally
cover about python spark using py spark
apart from these seven modules you'll
also get two free self-based courses
let's actually take a look at the course
so this is your machine learning
engineer Masters program you'll have
nine courses to 100 plus hours of
Interactive
Learning this is the whole course
curriculum which we just discussed here
there are seven modules apart from these
seven modules you'll be given two free
self-based courses which I'll discuss
shortly you can also get to know the
average annual salary for a machine
learning engineer which is over
$134,000 and there are also a lot of job
openings in the field of machine
learning Ai and data science so the job
titles that you might get are machine
learning engineer AI engineer data
scientist data and analytics manager NLP
engineer and data engineer so this is
basically the curriculum your first will
be Python Programming certification
machine learning certification using
python graphical modeling reinforcement
learning natural language processing Ai
and deep learning with tens oflow python
spark certification training using pypar
if you want to learn more about each of
these modules you can just go and view
the curriculum
they'll explain each and every concept
that they'll be showing in this module
all of this is going to be covered here
this is just the first module
right now at the end of this project you
will be given a verified certificate of
completion with your name on it and
these are the free elective courses that
you're going to get one is your python
scripting certification training and the
other is your python statistics for data
science course both of these courses
explain python in depth this second
course on statistics will explain all
the concepts of Statistics probability
descriptive statistics inferential
statistics time series testing data data
clustering regression modeling and so on
so each of the module is designed in
such a way that you'll have a practical
demo or a practical implementation after
each and every module so all the
concepts that are theoretically taught
to you will be explained through
practical demos right this way you'll
get a good understanding of the entire
machine learning and AI Concepts so if
any of you are interested in enrolling
for this program or if you want to learn
more about the machine learning course
offered by jurea please leave your email
IDs in the comment section and we'll get
back to you with all the details of the
course so guys with this we come to the
end of this AI full course session I
hope all of you have understood the
basic concepts and the idea behind AI
machine learning deep learning and
natural language processing so if you
still have doubts regarding any of these
topics mention them in the comment
section and I'll try to answer all your
queries so guys thank you so much for
joining me in this session have a great
day I hope you have enjoyed listening to
this video please be kind enough to like
it and you can comment any of your
doubts and queries and we will reply
them at the earliest do look out for
more videos in our playlist And
subscribe to Eddie Rea channel to learn
more happy learning